+++
title = "3 Karma-vivṛti"
+++
Karma-vivṛti, an exposition on karma  

DOI: 10.4324/9781003018742-3

## Introduction

Due to the substantial political pressures encountered during the era of Jaisingh II, numerous Vaiṣṇava sects were forced to re-examine their relations with practices such as *karma* and *varṇāśrama*. They were expected to ascribe importance to public responsibility and orthodox modes of conduct; subsequently, they were obliged to reconfigure their theological positions to satisfy the stipulations of the King. In other words, they had to present their *bhakti* practices in light of the conservative and orthodox guidelines delineated by the King. As a result, several novel works were fashioned by the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition which strived to tackle these concerns. The *Karma-vivṛti* of Kṛṣṇadeva Sarvabhauma Bhaṭṭācarya is an example of such a text that emerged in this period. However, before we embark on an examination of this text which elucidates upon *karma-bhakti* relations*,* I will take a brief look at the precise nature of *karma* in this period and then proceed to evaluate why incorporating and accommodating *karma* may have posed a problem for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect.

## Definitions

### Nature of **dharma**,** varṇāśrama** and **karma** in Jaisingh II’s era

Before analysing the role of *karma* within Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theology, it’s imperative to briefly explore what *karma* may translate to in the context of Jaisingh II’s reign. This will also entail exploring notions such as *dharma* and *varṇāśrama* which frequently appear in the course of the key discussions on *karma*. 

I will begin by exploring the concept of *dharma*. 

1  In the framework of Jaisingh II’s reign, a significant feature of an individual’s *dharmic* responsibilities is governed by the rules pertaining to one’s *varṇa* or social class and *āśrama* or order of life. This is often commonly known as one’s *sva-dharma*, which is derived from a person’s age, gender, social position, marital status, order of life and so on. This contrasts with the rules that govern all members of society known as *sādhāraṇa-dharma* or *sāmānya-dharma*, “common” or “general” rules of behaviour; 2  such values are described in BP 7.11.8–12, which illustrates the general principles to be followed by all, such as mercy, truthfulness, penance and cleanliness. Therefore, the following of *dharma* within this social system tries to draw a balance between the codes of conduct for all and the individual stipulations pertaining to one’s *varṇa* and *āśrama*. The *varṇāśrama* system divides society into four major *varṇas*, namely the *brāhmaṇas*, *kṣatriyas*, *vaiṣyas* and *śūdras*. The system provided a social hierarchy with the King at the top alongside the *brāhmaṇas*; preserving this social order proved critical for Jaisingh II as it provided religious legitimation for him to be the sovereign ruler of all in his domain. The notions of *dharma* and* varṇāśrama*, therefore, navigated several areas such as social positions, values and religion.

The concept of* dharma* is closely related to *karma*, 3  specifically that of *varṇāśrama-dharma*. In this period, one’s prescribed *karma* was primarily determined by one’s *varṇa* and *āśrama*. However, historically the concept of *karma* has conveyed distinctive ideas in different ages. The concept of *karma* pervades most *Sanskrit* texts, including the *Samhitās*, *Brāhmaṇas*, *Upaniṣads*, *Purāṇās* and the epics. The concept is also a fundamental idea in Jain and Buddhist literature. The term takes on various meanings according to the text. In the Vedic texts, the *Samhitās* and *Brāhmaṇas*, the term *karma* came to denote a ritual or sacrificial or liturgical rite, often equated with the term *iṣtapūrta*. In these texts, through the practice of *karma* one would attain heaven upon rebirth. Yuvaraj Krishan states that the word *karman* occurs about 40 times in the *Ṛig Veda*. He also provides specific instances where sacrifice is denoted as *karma*; 4  for instance, the *śatapatha Brāhmaṇa* I.1.2.1 describes sacrifice as *karma*, 5  and I.7.1.5 states that sacrifice is known as the greatest of works. 6  These Vedic texts provided the roots from which the doctrine of *karma* evolved. In the *Upaniṣads* the term *karman* or *karma* is also used as in the *Samhitās* and *Brāhmaṇas* to signify ritual actions. However, the underlying doctrine of *karma* is ultimately portrayed differently in *Vedāntic* texts such as the *Brahma-sūtras* and the *Upaniṣads*. Indeed, *karma* is frequently portrayed in the *Upaniṣads* as binding, temporary and futile. Therefore, as we trace the development of the doctrine of *karma*, we witness a caution over the practice of *karma*, even “good” actions, as they are all essentially considered impediments to liberation. Likewise, the Buddhists and Jains also claimed that ritualistic *karma* was a hindrance to emancipation.

In contrast to the prevalent condemnation of *karma*, the *Pūrva mīmāmsakas*, with the innovation of the *nitya* and *naimittika karma* categories, rejuvenated ritualistic practices promoting *karmas* as compulsory acts. 7  The *Pūrva mīmāmsakas* propagated four categories of religious *karmas*: *nitya*,* naimittika*,* kāmya* and* niṣiddha*. 8  Furthermore, the *Pūrva mīmāmsakas* maintained that *nitya*, *naimittika* and *kāmya* acts are prescribed by the Vedas and are therefore *dharma* or *vaidika karma*, Vedic acts. Indeed, many schools asserted that, being Vedic injunctions, both *nitya* and *naimittika* acts were deemed to be mandatory and only *kāmya*-*karma* was considered optional, as such pursuits were performed to achieve materialistic objectives such as entrance into the heavenly realms. One’s social position in the *varṇāśrama* system determined one’s obligations to execute specific *nitya* and *naimittika karmas*; for example non-householders or those who were not in the *gṛhastra āśrama* were under no obligation to execute the *pañca*-*mahā*-*yajñas* \(five great sacrifices\). Such *varṇāśrama*-orientated responsibilities were delineated in texts like the *Manu-smṛti*. 9  

The doctrine of *karma* and rebirth can also be observed in the *Purāṇās* and epics, depicted primarily through narrations and historical accounts. In texts like the* Mahābhārata*, however, the practice of *karma* evolves and is no longer limited to merely sacrificial acts but refers to all dimensions of action, including the mental and the physical. 10  Furthermore, such texts promote a notion of action that enables one to perform one’s duties of *karma* in the material realm without becoming entangled with their worldly roles, under the condition that such actions are offered to the Supreme \(*niṣkāma-karma*\). This eliminates the potential detrimental ramifications of *karma*. Epics such as the *Rāmāyana* and *Māhābharata* also illustrate in detail the nature of ideal acts within a social context defined by *varṇāśrama-dharma*. Hence these works played a vital role in exemplifying how *karma* should be enacted. Indeed, it is interesting to consider that there are several compilations related to Rāma 11  in the Jaipur city palace library in which he is regularly referred to as the archetype King. Jaisingh II was also likened to the great figure from the *Māhābharata*, King Yudhiṣṭhira, also known as *dharmarāja*, the King of *dharma*. Jaisingh II’s passion for the enactment of rituals is also well documented; consequently, *brahmins*, such as Rātnakara Bhaṭṭa, were employed to execute Vedic rituals such as the *Vājapeya Yajña*. Rātnakara also composed a work known as the “*JayasimhaKalpadruma*” on the *nitya* and *naimittika karmas* executed by Jaisingh II throughout his life. There were also numerous ritual literatures commissioned by Jaisingh II, as listed by Bahura. 12  Thus, notions of ideal *karma* were derived from and inspired by such texts and were the foundation to constructing a state such as Jaipur grounded on the tenets of *dharma*.

## Is the practice of **karma** a problem?

For the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school, the ultimate goal of all practice and philosophical pursuance surpasses the traditional aims of religion, wealth, pleasure and liberation in favour of an ultimate purpose to nurture unconditional and spontaneous *prema* or love for their supreme deity, Kṛṣṇa. Any effort or endeavour that does not serve this goal is discarded and avoided. Indeed, devotion or *bhakti* is not only the ultimate goal, i.e. *prema-bhakti*, the highest stage of *bhakti*, but also the method of attaining it, known as *sādhana-bhakti*. Nevertheless, the tradition acknowledges two other authentic *yoga* paths: *karma* and *jñāna*. Therefore, considering the means and objective is exclusively *bhakti*, what role, if any, does the practice of *karma* have? 13  And subsequently what is the precise obligation to the performance of *karma* defined by the *varṇāśrama* system for a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava practitioner?

As we examine the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition’s relationship with *karma* what becomes explicitly clear is that although the tradition does not go so far as to reject the practice of *karma* overtly, it does nevertheless caution *bhakti* practitioners over their engagement with *karma*. A general aversion towards engaging in worldly roles due to fear of entanglement appears to be a prevalent feature of the tradition. Such troubles are evident even within the popular definition of *bhakti*. In the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.1.11, Rūpa, a leading teacher of the tradition, defines the highest devotion as follows: “The highest devotion is continuous and devoted service to Kṛṣṇa performed in a favourable way. It is free of all other desires and unobscured by knowledge or activity.” 14  This definition functions as the “root verse” from which various features of *bhakti* are understood. In this definition, Rūpa cautions the *bhakti* practitioner against the enactment of *karma*. Jīva, the celebrated successor to Rūpa and the tradition’s most prolific author, clarifies the nature of action to be cautious over. In reference to this passage, he states: “Here, ritual action refers to the *nitya* and *naimittika* acts as revealed in the *smṛtis* and other texts, but not to acts used in worship of Kṛṣṇa, because this entails continuous service to him.” 15  Therefore, it is clear from Jīva’s comments that the nature of *karma* that is discouraged is that delineated by the *varṇāśrama* system.

According to Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, even Caitanya, the founder of the tradition, appears to relegate the importance of *karma*. In his well-known conversation with Rāmānanda Rāya in South India, Caitanya asks Rāmānanda Rāya to explain the ultimate goal of life using evidence from the scriptures. In the initial stages of this conversation Rāmānanda first proposed, as the ultimate goal, *varṇāśrama* or the observance of the four social and four spiritual orders of life and executing one’s duties according to this framework. However, Caitanya retorted that this proposition was superficial, 16  in other words, that it concerns that which is external, for *varṇāśrama* pertains to bodily concerns and not the ultimate self, and consequently he petitioned Rāmānanda for further propositions. Recognising this, Rāmānanda progressively proposed other positions, one after another, so that by the end of the dialogue the full gamut of wisdom was traversed and the various paths leading to the ultimate goal were explored. The exchange led them from the notion of merely executing *varṇāśrama* duties to offering one’s *karmas* to Kṛṣṇa to relinquishing one’s *karmas* completely; from there the conversation progressed to *bhakti* mixed with knowledge, to pure devotion without any adulteration \(*prema-bhakti*\), and to the pinnacle of *bhakti* which is expressed by *Rādhā*. 17  This analysis demonstrates emphatically that *karma* scores very low on the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava hierarchy of importance.

Another example from Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja’s biography of Caitanya further illustrates the reluctance of the architect of the tradition to permit *karma* practice alongside *bhakti*. During Caitanya’s travels in South India, he encounters the Mādhva renunciates in Udupi. The Mādhva school’s emphasis on *karma* made it an object of criticism from Caitanya. He opens his exchange with them by asking them to describe the process to achieve perfection, to which they respond,
>  
> The *varṇāśrama-dharma* and presenting \[oneself\] to Kṛṣṇa: these are the best *sādhanas* \(methods of achieving perfection\) of the Kṛṣṇa-*bhakta*. Gaining the five kinds of *mukti* \(liberation\) and going to Vaikuṇṭha, this is the ultimate s*ādhya* \(goal\), and the* śāstras* attest it. 18   

Caitanya strongly rejected this claim, and in his refutation states,
>  
> The *śāstras* say “listening to *kīrtana*,” and that Kṛṣṇa-*prema* as a result of service is the highest *sādhana*. For *prema* comes to Kṛṣṇa from *śravaṇa* and *kīrtana*: and that is the highest end of man, the limits of the goals of men. 19  

Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja also refers to BP 7.5.23–24; these two verses outline the key nine practices of *bhakti*, which includes the practice of *śravaṇa* \(hearing\) and *kīrtana* \(chanting\) of the glories of Kṛṣṇa to further substantiate Caitanya’s claim. Caitanya also states: “The abandonment of *karma* and the vilification of *karma* – this the *śāstras* attest; there is never any *prema*-*bhakti* of Kṛṣṇa from *karma*.” 20  He quotes BP 11.11.32 and BG 18.66 and BP 11.20.9 to further substantiate his position. 21  In response, the Mādhva renunciate half-heartedly agrees, but presents alternative explanations for assigning significance to *varṇāśrama*. 22  Now, whether or not the reprimand dispensed is justifiable is not of primary interest for our purposes. 23  The principal concern here is the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect’s stance towards *karma* and its role within *bhakti* practice. Significantly, the founder of the tradition here explicitly disapproves of the practice of *karma* and its role in achieving the highest goal, *prema-bhakti*.

Another core text for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school is the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*. The *Purāṇa*’s own account of its origin provides further insight into the problem of *karma*. It is stated that Vyāsa, despite having compiled numerous sacred texts, particularly the great epic the *Mahābhārata*, remained very despondent. In this state, his teacher Nārada Muni arrived at his hermitage on the bank of the River Sarasvatī. Upon seeing Nārada, Vyāsa offered all due respects to his teacher. Nārada then began to address his student and responded to his despondency. According to BP 1.5.2, Nārada asked, “O greatly fortunate one, son of Parāśara \(Vyāsa\), are you pleased by identifying the self with the body or the mind?” 24  Nārada explained that despite his efforts to compose literatures of sacred content for the benefit of others, Vyāsa had mistakenly identified the body and mind with the ontological self. Furthermore, in BP 1.5.8 Nārada added, “You have not praised the pure glories of the Supreme. Anything that does not please the Supreme is considered a defective philosophy.” 25  This was Nārada’s diagnosis of Vyāsadeva’s predicament, and therefore despite compiling so many works he had not dedicated a meaningful portion of his writings to glorify the Supreme and instead provided more attention to that which pertains to worldly affairs. Vyāsa’s objective had been to regulate and discipline worldly activities or *karma* so that people could progressively pursue spiritual goals. However, Nārada clarifies in this passage that such instructions would instead fan worldly desires, detracting people from pursuing self-realisation. Considering Nārada’s assessment, we can further appreciate the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition’s aversion to *karma* and their concerns that such activities would distract the practitioner from *bhakti*, the ultimate aspiration. This caution to worldly activities is demonstrated in Vyāsa’s novel compilation in response to Nārada’s criticisms, the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, which declares from the very beginning in BP 1.1.2, “Here, the highest *dharma* completely rejects deceit, which is understandable by those devotees who are without envy.” 26  In other words, the highest *dharma* must not be tinged by any material motivation, and this is the core theme that pervades the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*.

Another important concern is that in contrast to *karma*, qualifying for *bhakti* doesn’t stipulate restrictions related to birth or caste. Providing significance to *karma* would conclude in importance being laid upon such restrictions, curbing the broad reach and appeal of *bhakti*. For example, in BG 9.32 and BP 2.7.46 it is explained that regardless of worldly status one can take up the path of *bhakti* and attain perfection; *varṇāśrama*, in comparison, is contingent on worldly credentials. Therefore, the teachings of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school appear to neglect the importance of apparent *karma*-based identities governed by one’s birth, occupation, gender and so on. Indeed, in light of salvation one’s position in the world, whether grand or meek according to social order, is to be considered essentially insignificant. Such self-conceptions are considered to be *abhimānas*, erroneous notions of self-image, fundamentally different to one’s true self. Consequently, the conviction that a person’s self-understanding can be altered insinuates that one’s social position also fundamentally changes. This lies in opposition to the more traditional view that one’s social position and occupational role is determined by one’s *karma*, which cannot be eradicated in one’s lifetime. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, in contrast, believe that one’s social condition according to *karma* can be altered by the benevolent grace of Kṛṣṇa, and therefore someone of low socio-cultural status for instance, by the practice of *bhakti*, would obtain an elevated social standing worthy of increased respect. Considering the disparity between the rigid traditional notions of *varṇāśrama* and the more malleable path of *bhakti* practice, such tensions inevitably posed a challenge for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect in accommodating the underlying attitudes pertaining to *karma*.

Returning to the foremost teachers of the tradition, Sanātana’s comments on one of the seed verses of the *Gītā*, BG 18.66, further highlights the view that pure *bhakti* entails the complete abandonment of *karma*. Sanātana writes as such in the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* 10.63 while commenting on BG 18.66. The author advocates that *bhakti* culminates in the complete abandonment of *karma*, whether daily or occasional rituals, and that one should subsequently take complete refuge in Kṛṣṇa alone. Indeed, if one does this, one need not worry about incurring sin. 27  However, this interpretation differs from Śrī Vaiṣṇava commentators such as Rāmānuja, who sought to continue *dharma*s even within the scope of *bhakti* and *prapatti*. For example, Rāmānuja states in his commentary to BG 18.66 that “All *dharmas* means *karma*, *jñāna* and *bhakti yogas* which are the means for attaining the highest good, by offering them as worship with great affection according to eligibility only act. One should abandon the notion of agency, results of actions and so on.” 28  According to Rāmānuja’s interpretation, it is not *karma* that is to be abandoned but rather the sense of agency and results, whereas from the perspective of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition it appears that *karma* itself is needed to be wholly abandoned. 

So far, I have shared numerous examples from foundational scriptures and teachers of the tradition endorsing the abandonment of *karma* in pursuance of *bhakti*. *Karma* appears to be a problem as it is often associated with worldly enjoyment and binds one to the world, and often the outcome of such a practice is the attainment of heavens, which is the ultimate manifestation of material pleasure. Such outcomes conflict with the ultimate purpose of a *bhakti* practitioner. We may recall that pure *bhakti* was defined as “free from the desire for anything other than Kṛṣṇa.” For devotion to be pure and paramount, as described in the definitions, one has to abandon material pursuits, which are expressed frequently through the religious paths of ritual action or *karma*. Thus, the *bhakta* hopes to renounce the desire for such goals to properly dedicate himself to devotion, because they are incompatible with it. “As long as the fiend of longing for enjoyment or liberation resides in the heart, how can the joy of devotion arise there?” Rūpa asks. Or as Jīva puts it, “how can one travelling east obtain an object moving west?” 29  Now if social norms pertaining to the *varṇāśrama* system, norms that had served as the primary source of conduct for orthodox Hindu communities for centuries, were to be swiftly abandoned in a nonchalant manner with the adoption of *bhakti*, one can appreciate how such a stance would worry those in political power who were responsible for good governance.

It is also worth highlighting that despite the early prolific authorship within the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, it had produced neither a single text to convey the theological basis for engaging within public or social systems governed by *varṇāśrama*, nor any significant passages offering guidance or insight into how a practitioner might behave in or integrate into such environments. Nor have they produced commentaries upon or in any substantial way referred to politically orientated or *karma*-driven texts such as the *dharma-śāstras*. The tradition’s most prominent texts relate instead to commentaries on the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, biographies of Caitanya and philosophical expositions on a range of topics and themes such as *rasa*, none of which apply categorically to the subject of public or social theology in relation to *varṇāśrama*.

## Attempts to connect **karma** and **bhakti** 

Despite the dearth of scholarship on the precise role of *karma* and by extension the social responsibilities concerning a *bhakti* practitioner in the early phase of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect, in the mid-eighteenth century a wave of texts appeared, striving to configure a bridge between *bhakti* and *karma*. These writings emerged as the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition entered into a dialogue with King Jaisingh II of the Kachvāhā dynasty who was keen on sects within his domain endorsing public engagement defined by *varṇāśrama* and *karma*. Some Vaiṣṇava groups during this period considered the ascent of rituals and *karma* to be the concern of other groups. However, with the mounting political pressures in Jaipur, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect was obliged to provide robust responses and therefore we observe a literary trend emerge within the tradition endeavouring to balance the tension between orthodox practices and a transcendent religion of love apparently opposed to the norms promoted. Subsequently, there was a concerted attempt by the tradition within this period to theologically endorse the role of *karma* in the life of a *bhakta*. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition was not unique in this regard, and in fact a number of groups, such as the Puṣṭi *mārga*, began analysing their sects’ relations with *varṇāśrama*.

Kṛṣṇadeva Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, the King’s chief pandit and a renowned Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, argued vehemently for the compatibility of *karma* and *bhakti*. Kṛṣṇadeva had become an advisor of the King of Jaipur by the year 1715. 30  At the behest of the King, Kṛṣṇadeva composed texts such as the *Karma-vivṛti*, the *Jñāna-vivṛti* and the *Bhakti-vivṛti*. He attempted to create a theological system that held the tensions between these three systems in balance, at times even pushing the boundaries set by the tradition. In the *Karma-vivṛti*, 31  he argues that “a certain action is favourable \(*sāṃmukhya*\) because it is ordered by the lord and offered to the lord. Similarly, an action is unfavourable \(*asāṃmukhya*\) to the lord when these characteristics are absent.” 32  He further explains that criticism is heard of in regard to acts that are unfavourable \(*asāṃmukhya*\) 33  and, in fact, “\(*Sammukhya*\) is directly *bhakti*, and a means to attain pure devotion \(ś*uddha-bhakti*\), and proceeding which is a means to attain intense devotion \(*bhāva-bhakti*\).” 34  He also explains that offering *karma* is a gateway to *jñāna* and *bhakti*. 35  Kṛṣṇadeva thus argues that *karma*, when performed as an offering to Kṛṣṇa, leads to the highest forms of *bhakti*.

Jaisingh II, as well as being the King, was also a *bhakta* of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava deity *Govindadeva* and commissioned a text known as the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, an exposition on who is eligible to perform *karma*. In a similar vein, *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* promotes the compatibility of *karma* and *bhakti*; the text invokes two critical verses from Vaiṣṇava literatures that emphasise the importance of following rules pertaining to *varṇāśrama*. The first is from the *Viṣṇu Purāṇa* 3.8.9, wherein Parāśara states: “Viṣṇu who is the supreme person is worshipped by a person whose conduct is in accordance with *varṇāśrama*, there is no other path to satisfy him.” 36  The second is from the *Viṣṇu-dharma Purāṇa* 76.31, which offers a statement by Bhagavān: “*śruti*, *smṛti* are my order, one who lives while transgressing these, he cuts my order, he hates me, even if he is my devotee, he is not a Vaiṣṇava.” 37  These two prominent texts are revered by Vaiṣṇavas. These two verses are deployed in the opening passage of the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*. These verses clearly stipulate that adhering to the rules and regulations of the *varṇāśrama* system not only satisfies Viṣṇu but is indeed an order directly from Viṣṇu. A Vaiṣṇava, as a worshipper of Viṣṇu, should therefore exhaust all efforts to follow the guidelines of *varṇāśrama* as they are pleasing to Viṣṇu. This of course also reveals that the practice of *karma* is compatible with that of *bhakti*, because ultimately, they both strive towards the same purpose, namely the satisfaction of Viṣṇu.

These specialised works are primarily strategic compilations of references from the foremost scriptures and teachers of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition. Indeed, both works owe the majority of their passages to renowned predecessor teachers of the tradition, as observed from the lengthy citations. It is obvious, however, that these texts were not intended to merely summarise earlier ideas. Rather, their readers were an audience of scriptural experts who were well acquainted with the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school’s leading teachers, the texts attempt to convince them of the value and necessity of following rigidly the injunctions and prohibitions pertaining to *karma*, utilising the writings of the leading teachers of the sect as building blocks to construct their arguments. The primary concern of the teachers referenced is to clarify the verses at hand for a *bhakti* practitioner, whereas these expositions on *karma* attempt to weave the verses themselves into a coherent system expounding the importance and relevance of the practice of *karma*.

This turbulent historical period for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas also ushers in their first commentaries on the *Bhagavad*-*gītā*, a text widely regarded as a book of action, especially in modern times. This text is therefore one of the most, if not the most, suitable text within the Hindu tradition through which a theological basis for social and political engagement can be expounded. Considering the wide appeal of the *Gītā* throughout history, and particularly within the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect, it is certainly surprising that the tradition produced no commentary on the *Gītā* until approximately 200 years after the tradition’s inauguration by Caitanya. It is only in the early eighteenth century that the first *Gītā* commentary emerges, written by Viśvanātha Cakravartī, a key player in the eighteenth century. This peculiarity was further accentuated as Viśvanātha’s commentary was swiftly followed by another *Gītā* commentary from his student Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, perhaps also inspired by the times.

Such texts thus serve as a bridge between the worlds of *bhakti* and *karma*, mediating between devotion and action. These foundational texts would secure an acceptable place for *dharmic* thought within the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition and serve as political tools for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect to justify its authenticity and relevance amongst the myriad of *sampradāyas* prevalent at that time. Just as the tradition had responded to criticisms through Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa’s *Brahma-sūtras* commentary, similarly the tradition employed these texts to respond to a range of critiques during this period. The *Karma-vivṛti*, the* Karmādhikāra-nirnaya* and the first *Gītā* commentaries promoted the concept of “good” *karma*, acts that do not impede the practice of *bhakti*, but which were in fact recommended, even required, for novices on the *bhakti* path. Such acts inform aspirants of their eternal nature as servants of Kṛṣṇa; they steady the aspirants’ practice of *bhakti* and finally direct them to the ultimate goal, *prema-bhakti*. Essentially, *karma* was now portrayed as a beneficial practice for the Vaiṣṇava, provided it served the practice of *bhakti* and directed one to the desired goal – unadulterated *prema* for Kṛṣṇa. Thus, the traditional purpose of rituals pertaining to *karma* was redirected away from material allurements in the heavenly realms or even liberation from the cycle of rebirth. Now *karma* enabled the sincere practitioner to achieve the highest goal of *bhakti*. Responding to the political concerns, these specialised works laid the foundation for a transformative dialogue between the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect and the major political powers in the mid-eighteenth century. 

## Key themes

Although *karma* and *bhakti*’s compatibility is viewed as questionable, and despite the lack of early textual sources within the tradition regarding its theological obligations within the public arena, it is clear from the tradition’s history that there exist systems of socio-political engagement founded upon implicit philosophical and theological ideas. Nevertheless, it is not until the eighteenth century that texts solely expanding on the public responsibility for members of the tradition providing frameworks and guidelines appear. Four significant voices in this era, Kṛṣṇadeva Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Viśvanātha Cakravartī and Jaisingh II, in different ways promulgate this development in the eighteenth century. I will analyse several key themes from their works and in doing so will address the following questions:

1. Are *karma* and *bhakti* compatible? Does *karma* lead to *bhakti*? In addressing these questions, I will investigate the dynamic relationship between socio-political responsibility and divinity. 
2.  When can, or when should, *karma* \(and its concomitant interactions within the socio-political domain\) be abandoned? In answering this question, I will explore the critical theme of *sraddhā*, or faith, and analyse its role and influence on the jurisdiction of *karma*. 
3.  To what degree are notions such as “*lokasaṅgraha*,” or responsible public conduct, fundamental to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition’s engagement in the public sphere? 

In the remainder of this chapter, I will focus on the first and in many ways the foundational theme noted above. Through the *Karma-vivṛti* of Kṛṣṇadeva I will explore the theological rationalisations provided for the synthesis of *karma* and *bhakti* practices. In the following chapter, I will address the remaining two questions, focusing on the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, an exposition on the jurisdiction or authority of *karma* for a *bhakti* practitioner. And in the fifth and final chapter I will explore these themes as presented in Viśvanātha and Baladeva’s commentaries on the *Bhagavad-gītā*, respectively.

## Kṛṣṇadeva on the compatibility of **karma** and **bhakti** 

The *Karma-vivṛti* was composed by Kṛṣṇadeva on the order of King Jaisingh II. This is evident from the opening passage of the text, in which Kṛṣṇadeva states: “Homage to Śrī Rāma. By the order of the glorious King of Kings \[Jaisingh II\], after paying respects at the feet of Caitanya, for the sake of purification of *karma*, I have written this exposition on *karma*.” 38  As explained in the previous chapter, Kṛṣṇadeva, having studied with Viśvanātha in Vṛndāvana, relocates to Jaipur to perform a critical role for the King, serving as a *paṇḍita* and the chief religious advisor. Considering Kṛṣṇadeva’s intimate relationship with the King, it is highly probable that he composed this text to address the King’s desire to reconcile social responsibility with the pursuit of devotional liberation. 

The *Karma-vivṛti* itself is a careful selection of key passages from the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, *Bhagavad-gītā*, the works of Rūpa such as the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, the works of Jīva such as the *Bhakti-sandarbha*, the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* along with Sanatāna’s commentary, commentarial passages from Śrīdhara Svāmī on the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* and Viśvanātha’s *Sārārtha-darśiṇī* \(*Bhāgavata Purāṇa* commentary\). The author focuses on the theology of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Gosvāmīs, especially Jīva. In fact, there are very few passages composed by Kṛṣṇadeva himself, whose main contribution was therefore to philosophically establish and strengthen his argument on *karma* by invoking the authority of respected stalwarts of *Gauḍīya* Vaiṣṇava theology. Kṛṣṇadeva’s compilation therefore presents a comprehensive perspective of the tradition’s position on *karma*. He argues passionately that *karma* and *bhakti* are entirely compatible and puts forth the notion that *karma* has a vital function to play for a *bhakti* practitioner and even for one who has attained perfection on the *bhakti* path.

In the *Karma-vivṛti*, Kṛṣṇadeva strives to demonstrate that the performance of *karma* is conducive to the pursuit of *bhakti*, the ultimate goal for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava practitioner. I will share two pivotal examples of how Kṛṣṇadeva accomplishes this. In both examples, he refutes presentations that suggest *karma* and *bhakti* are not compatible for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava practitioners. In the first example, I will explore how he offers citations from various key canonical texts of the tradition, invoking prominent teachers of the tradition to provide a corrective reading of a passage in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Rūpa’s seminal text on *bhakti*, which apparently discredits the notion that *karma* can be offered to the Lord as a form of *bhakti*.

### Example 1: Kṛṣṇadeva’s refutation of **karma** not being considered **dāsyam** 

In this example, he refers to passage BRS 1.2.183–186, which appears to be a source of controversy:
>  
> \(183\)* Dāsyam* is offering activities \[to him\] and acting as his servant in every way. \(184\) Among them, the former \(definition\) is described in the *Skanda Purāṇa*, “Action \[according\] to one’s nature offered to the Supreme becomes *dharma* of the Supreme, *bhāgavata dharma*. What to speak of that action that is directly offered to him? \(such as hearing about Supreme and so on\).” \(185\) There are two kinds of service offered to Kṛṣṇa by Vaiṣṇavas. Auspicious actions according to one’s nature and likewise *japa*, meditation, worship and so on. \(186\) The qualification to perform activities is said to be small for those of small faith, \[nevertheless\] if offered to the Supreme it is considered *dāsyam* thus some persons say. 39  

Two types of *dāsyam*  40  are illustrated here, one of which includes offering *karma* to the Supreme. There appears to exist some controversy within the tradition regarding the inclusion of offering *karma* within the category of *dāsyam*. For instance, Kṛṣṇadeva omits Jīva’s comments on these verses in which he states that although some agree that offering *karma* is *dāsyam*, nevertheless Rūpa, the author of the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, does not consider it *dāsyam*. 41  Jīva also explains that *karma* in this context is not any action but action according to *varṇāśrama-dharma*. 42  Mukunda das Gosvāmī in his commentary to BRS 1.2.186 suggests that “some persons” refers to Śrīdhara Svāmī and so on, 43  Śrīdhara also declares that *dāsyam* is equal to *karmārpanam*, or offering *karma*, in his commentary to BP 7.5.23. This would be quite an endorsement for *karma* as* dāsyam* is considered one of the nine direct forms of *bhakti* as illustrated in BP 7.5.23. Thus, it appears that Rūpa reluctantly presents a second alternative to accommodate Śrīdhara’s perspective. If this is the case, this illustrates the high regard and respect the tradition had for Śrīdhara’s teachings. 44  Kṛṣṇadeva’s reference to this passage highlights the concerns within the tradition of *karma* and *bhakti*’s compatibility. Following his reference to BRS 1.2.183–186, Kṛṣṇadeva responds to the concerns regarding the offering of *karma* to be considered *dāsyam*. Kṛṣṇadeva states: “Even if offering of *karma* is not considered to be *dāsyam,* nevertheless it is certainly established as the *dharma* of the Supreme and thus a form of *bhakti*.” 45  To reinforce his position he quotes *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, where Sanatāna refers to BP 11.2.34, BP 11.29.8 and BG 9.27 to show that the offering of *karma* to the Supreme is *dharma* of the Supreme and thus leads to self-realisation. In this way Kṛṣṇadeva argues that although *dāsyam* may not include the offering of *karma* according to some, this offering of *karma* is still imbued with the nature of *bhāgavata* and hence serves the same purpose as *bhakti*. Following his reference to Sanatāna, Kṛṣṇadeva then turns his attention to Jīva’s comments in the *Bhakti-sandarbha*. In *Sandarbha* 217, Jīva illustrates that there are three types of *bhakti*:
>  
> This *bhakti* is of three types: *āropa-siddhā*, established by imposition; *saṅga-siddhā*, established by association; and *svarūpa-siddhā*; established by its own nature. Out of these, *āropa-siddhā*-*bhakti* consists of *karma* and similar practices, which although devoid of *bhakti* by themselves attain the quality of *bhakti* by being offered to the Supreme. *Saṅga-siddhā bhakti* refers to *jñāna* and *karma*, which although devoid of *bhakti* by themselves, become component parts of *bhakti* by being utilized as assistants of devotion. Two examples of verses are provided that illustrate this: BP 11.3.22 \(Learn the nature of the Supreme …\) and BP 11.3.23 \(Detach the mind from everything …\). 46  

In other words, as stated in BP 11.3.23 the act of detaching the mind from matter in itself has nothing to do with *bhakti*, but when executed intentionally as an aid to devotion it becomes surcharged with the potency of *bhakti*. In a similar fashion, *karma*, when offered to the Supreme, can be classified as *āropa-siddhā* or *saṅga-siddhā*, which are valid types of *bhakti*.

Jīva continues: 
>  
> Even spontaneous actions acquire the nature of the Supreme if offered to the Supreme, so what to speak of action in accordance with Vedic injunctions. BP 11.2.36 states: Whatever action one does with the body, mind, senses, speech, intellect and self, following one’s own nature, one should offer that with the understanding, this is for the Supreme Nārāyaṇa. 47  

According to this passage, whatever action is offered to the Supreme is of the same nature as the Supreme, even if it is not delineated by Vedic injunctions. This verse demonstrates emphatically the broad scope of potential offerings to the Supreme Nārayana. Jīva further explains that verse BP 11.2.36 mentioned is preceded by a specific request from King Nimi to hear about the sublime nature of *bhagavad-dharma*. As a consequence, BP 11.2.36 must be included in the category of *bhagavad-dharma*, for it appears in the natural conversational sequence. Furthermore, because there is an overlapping of the characteristics of *karma* offered to the Lord and *bhakti*, such actions should be considered non-different to *bhakti*. Thus, Kṛṣṇadeva refers to Jīva’s *Bhakti-sandarbha* to illustrate that in numerous ways the offering of *karma* to the Supreme is considered a form of *bhakti*.

In summary, Kṛṣṇadeva demonstrates that *karma* offered to the Supreme must at least be considered a form of *bhagavad-dharma* or *bhakti*, if not directly *dāsyam*, one of the nine direct types of *bhakti* which are the primary means of service for *bhakti* practitioners. 48  He justifies his stance by referencing the works of the foundational teachers of the tradition, such as Sanatāna and Jīva. If the offering of *karma* were to be included within the process of *dāsyam*, then this would be a significant endorsement for the compatibility of *karma* and *bhakti*. In light of Jīva’s view that Rūpa rejected the offering of *karma* as *dāsyam* in the passages of BRS 1.2.183–186 and considering that Rūpa is regarded to be a leading teacher of the tradition, many *bhakti* practitioners would perhaps disregard offering *karma* to the Supreme as a method of progress. Kṛṣṇadeva therefore goes to great lengths to illustrate that even if it is not to be accepted as a form of *dāsyam*, appropriate *karma* practice still culminates in *bhakti*. In this way, he promotes the adoption of *karma* offered to the Supreme as conducive to the ultimate purpose of the *bhakti* practitioner. What is especially noteworthy in his presentation is that he gathers citations to offer a corrective reading of a key passage in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, a foundational and highly revered text within the tradition. He draws on canonical texts such as the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* and the *Bhakti-sandarbha* to accomplish this. He attempts to reclaim Jīva’s reading of this section in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* which claims that Rūpa does not consider the offering of the activities as *dāsyam*, using largely Jīva himself to accomplish this. Kṛṣṇadeva adopts a similar strategy in the next example.

### Example 2: Kṛṣṇadeva’s refutation of an interpretation of BP 1.2.6 which discredits **karma** leading to **bhakti** 

Another significant passage in the *Karma-vivṛti* which displays how the execution of *karma* is conducive to the pursuit of *bhakti* involves the exploration of BP 1.2.6. This verse addresses a vital question in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*. A sage known as Sūta Gosvāmī is responding to questions presented by the sages of the *Naimiṣāraṇya* forest. They have inquired into what is the most essential instruction from the Vedic corpus for the purpose of enlightenment for the general populace. BP 1.2.6 appears as part of the response and proves to be critical for Kṛṣṇadeva as it highlights the relationship between *dharma* \(which includes *karma*\) and *bhakti*. For Kṛṣṇadeva it was vital that any doubts connecting these two categories were removed. According to Monika Horstmann this specific passage was the subject of continuous exegetical attention from various scholars of sects in this period. 49  

As explained previously, the King was concerned with the role of orthodox *dharma* in relation to *bhakti* practice, and therefore a number of commentators, including Kṛṣṇadeva, endeavoured to firmly establish the practice of *dharma*, and hence *karma*, as veritable paths alongside *bhakti* practice. It was crucial for Kṛṣṇadeva as a close adviser to the King to endorse this viewpoint, even if it required the adoption of severe measures. Kṛṣṇadeva asserts that BP 1.2.6 proves categorically that *karma* leads to *bhakti*. He analyses various teachers’ commentaries on this verse and refutes a significant teacher’s position which stood in opposition to his viewpoint. He begins by stating:
>  
> The offering of *karma* and so on to the Lord causes pure \(*suddha*\) *bhakti* is proved within the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* – BP 1.2.6 “Certainly the highest *dharma* of mankind is that from which there is *bhakti* unto he is who is beyond the senses \(the Supreme\). *Bhakti* is causeless and unbroken, by which the self is completely satisfied.” 50  

In his analysis of this passage, he shares perspectives on BP 1.2.6 from Śrīdhara Svāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī and Sanatāna Gosvāmī, the leading teachers of the tradition. Each of these teachers expand on the meaning of different aspects of the verse. However, each of their positions lends support to Kṛṣṇadeva’s interpretation of the verse, which is that the highest *dharma* of mankind consists of those acts of *dharma* which lead to *bhakti* characterised by hearing, chanting and so on; and *dharma* here can include *karma* offered to the Lord. Kṛṣṇadeva has intentionally shared the viewpoints of the founding teachers of the tradition as this provides the basis for Kṛṣṇadeva’s refutation of another prominent teacher’s comments on this verse. Surprisingly, the *purvapaksa* \(opponent\) is Viśvanātha, Kṛṣṇadeva’s very own teacher from Vṛndavana. 51  This is especially significant since it demonstrates the extent to which Kṛṣṇadeva was willing to endeavour in order to establish *karma* as an aide to *bhakti* for the King. As is the custom, Kṛṣṇadeva reveals neither the name of his *purvapaksa* nor that of the commentary to which he refers. However, a careful examination of the *Sārārtha-darśiṇī*, Viśvanātha’s commentary on the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, reveals the object of Kṛṣṇadeva’s criticism is his own teacher’s alternative reading of this verse. Before analysing the specifics of Kṛṣṇadeva’s refutation, I first outline Viśvanātha’s perspective on this crucial verse as also shared by Kṛṣṇadeva in his *Karma-vivṛti*.

Viśvanātha states in his *Sārārtha-darśiṇī* on BP 1.2.6: 
>  
> This *dharma*, for people, i.e., only for all human beings, is the higher one, i.e., the highest, characterized by hearing, chanting and so on. As stated in \(BP 6.3.22\): Indeed in this world the supreme *dharma* of all beings is recognized as *bhakti-yoga* to the Supreme beginning with chanting of his name … Therefore, *dharma*, distinguished by the word “*para*” \(highest\) is only *bhakti-yoga*. Thus here \(BP 6.3.22\), the usage of “*vat\[up\]*” suffix \[in the word “*etāvān*,” “that much”\] and the word “*eva*” \(only\) forbids anything else from being expressed as supreme *dharma*. \(BP 1.2.6\) “from which there is *bhakti*,” devotion means characterized by *prema*, and “causeless” means that it is only produced without a cause. For these reasons, mixed devotion is excluded. 52  

We must remember that BP 1.2.6 is a defining and pivotal verse for Kṛṣṇadeva, who utilises it to prove that *karma* offered to the Lord leads to *bhakti*. Prior to his refutation of Viśvanātha’s commentary on this verse, he outlines the viewpoint of other prominent teachers accepted as authorities on the subject of *bhakti* and demonstrates that their comments are consistent with his own stance on *karma*. Only then does he approach Viśvanātha’s position, which proposes that *para-dharma*, the highest *dharma* in this verse, should be accepted as only *bhakti-yoga* characterised by hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa and similar direct *bhakti* practices. This categorically excludes *karma* as a path leading to *bhakti*. For Viśvanātha, *para-dharma* can only be *sādhana-bhakti*, which culminates in *prema-bhakti*, whereas for Kṛṣṇadeva *para-dharma* is broader and includes *varṇāśrama*, and in the context of this verse leads to *sādhana-bhakti*. Thus, Kṛṣṇadeva is faced with the uncomfortable but vital task of refuting Viśvanātha’s comments on this verse. I will now attempt to systemise the principal objections that Kṛṣṇadeva stresses in response to the various facets of Viśvanātha’s reading. This exercise will highlight ever more strongly Kṛṣṇadeva’s support for the role of *karma* in the life of a *bhakti* practitioner.

### Objection 1: Viśvanātha utilises BP 6.3.22 to define BP 1.2.6 and thus forbids anything other than **bhakti-yoga** from being expressed as **para-dharma** 

It is crucial for Viśvanātha to refer to BP 6.3.22 to define the term “*para-dharma*” in BP 1.2.6, which he states can only mean *sādhana-bhakti* and thus does not include *karma* offered to the Lord. Therefore, considering Kṛṣṇadeva’s objection to this interpretation, 53  he begins a lengthy refutation regarding the usage of this verse \(BP 6.3.22\) in defining BP 1.2.6. He provides the following reasons:

1. The first argument he states is: “BP 6.3.22 is spoken well after BP 1.2.6 and BP 1.2.6 is an unprecedented statement.” 54  BP 1.2.6 is referred to as *apūrvatvāt*, this expression denotes an idea that is introduced for the first time in a narrative or a passage, appearing at times suddenly and often denotes the central purpose or import of the passage. In this scenario Kṛṣṇadeva argues that *para-dharma* has not been discussed earlier, and thus nothing earlier can be used to define BP 1.2.6, what to speak of something later. Therefore, as BP 6.3.22 appears significantly later, there is no logical reason to link the two verses and subsequently utilise BP 6.3.22 to determine the meaning of BP 1.2.6. 
2.  Secondly, the words “from which comes *bhakti* for *Adhokṣaja* \(the Supreme\) in BP 1.2.6 would have lost its meaning.” 55  The assertion that *bhakti* leads to *bhakti* does not appear to follow any logical sequence, as one would expect a cause and its effect to be two separate items. 56  
3.  It is also stressed in numerous scriptures that *dharma* means *varṇāśrama* and therefore it seems unlikely that *bhakti* would be equated with *para-dharma* in this example. He lists various instances where the word *dharma* means *varṇāśrama*: 
>  
> BP 6.1.40: “*dharma* is that which is contained in the Vedas”; BP 1.2.8: “the well-executed *dharma*”; BP 1.2.13: “therefore of the *dharma* executed by the people”; and BP 1.2.9: “of the *dharma* which is meant for liberation.” Another source is *dharma-śāstras*. Since what is experienced in hundreds of sources is only *dharma* characterized by the practice of *varṇāśrama*, this meaning only is present. 57  

Considering these examples, Kṛṣṇadeva argues that there is no compelling reason to take an alternative meaning of *dharma* in this case.

1. iv. Kṛṣṇadeva also contends that it would be inconsistent to replace *dharma* with *bhakti* because such an interpretation would then render other significant verses illogical. He references BP 1.2.8 as an example. Following shortly after BP 1.2.6, this verse would then read “*sādhana-bhakti* is considered useless if it doesn’t bring attraction to the narrations of the Supreme.” 58  This would not be a sound statement from a theological perspective as *sādhana-bhakti* itself involves hearing narrations of the Supreme. Indeed, exploring Viśvanātha’s comments on BP 1.2.8 demonstrates that he accepts *dharma* to mean *varṇāśrama*-*dharma* and not *sādhana-bhakti*. However, Viśvanātha maintains his stance and argues that this verse explains why *dharma* in the form of *varṇāśrama* should not be considered *para-dharma* \(following on from his reading of BP 1.2.6\). He firstly states that “following *varṇāśrama* leads to the heavenly realms and not attraction to the Lord.” 59  To substantiate this point, he quotes BP 4.31.10 and BP 4.31.12. He concludes stating “therefore, one should abandon those duties \(*varṇāśrama*\) and perform *para-dharma* mentioned in the previous verse \(BP 1.2.6\) consisting of hearing and chanting about the Lord.” 60  

Viśvanātha then raises a possible objection by quoting BP 11.20.11 \(“In this very life situated in one’s duty according to *varṇāśrama*, free from sin and pure, one obtains pure knowledge or, by fortune *bhakti* unto me”\). 61  According to this verse *karma* could lead to *bhakti*. He admits there may be some truth to this but notes that the word “*yadṛcchayā*” is used which denotes the notion of self-manifestation, “by itself,” and therefore infers that *bhakti* is self-created and not even *niskāma-karma* \(desireless action\) is the cause of *bhakti*. 62  Interestingly, he quotes BP 1.2.6 to substantiate this view. Viśvanātha’s interpretation of “*yadi*” plays an important role in his understanding of BP 1.2.8. Generally, “*yadi*” translates to “if,” which when applied to verse BP 1.2.8 would mean that *varṇāśrama* is useless only if it does not generate attraction to the Lord. As Viśvanātha considers *varṇāśrama* fundamentally useless, in this instance, he explores alternative meanings of “*yadi*,” advocating that “*yadi*” here indicates disgust generated from wasted labour or effort. He refers to the *Medinī Sanskrit* dictionary which defines *yadi* as disgust or doubt. 63  Alternatively, “*yadi*” can also be used to express doubt where no doubt exists, as in the example “if the Vedas are proof.” 64  He also references the sentence “You, the protector, place your foot on the head of obstacles,” 65  wherein “*yadi*” expresses certainty, which is also how Śrīdhara Svāmī explains *yadi*. 66  In this way Viśvanātha argues passionately that *karma* or *varṇāśrama* is always useless and thus should not be accommodated or adopted. Therefore, although Kṛṣṇadeva suggests that BP 1.2.8 would not be comprehendible if Viśvanātha rendered *para-dharma* to mean *sādhana-bhakti* in BP 1.2.6, in contrast Viśvanātha employs BP 1.2.8 to further substantiate his viewpoint regarding the futility of *varṇāśrama*.

1. v. Kṛṣṇadeva also objects to Viśvanātha’s claim that in BP 6.3.22 the suffix “*vat*” and emphatic particle “*eva*” do not permit *bhakti* from being expressed as anything other than *para-dharma*. Kṛṣṇadeva counters that BP 6.3.22 does not prohibit *para-dharma* from being called anything other than *bhakti*, but rather emphasises that *bhakti-yoga* is the highest *dharma*. This is corroborated by alternative uses of the term *para-dharma* in verses such as *BP 7.15.13:* “*para-dharma* \[is a *dharma*\] inspired by others” and BG 3.35: “the other’s *dharma* \(*para-dharma*\) brings fear.” 67 . Kṛṣṇadeva therefore argues that the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* itself does not support the contention that *para-dharma* refers exclusively to *bhakti* as Viśvanātha claims and thus reinforces Kṛṣṇadeva’s assertion that *para-dharma* can also include the offering of *karma* to the Supreme. 
2.  Kṛṣṇadeva also argues that BP 6.3.22 and BP 1.2.6 do not deal with the same subject, and must be understood in relation to their own individual fields or contexts. BP 1.2.6 describes that *dharma* which generates *bhakti* to the Lord as superior to all other types of *dharma*, whereas BP 6.3.22 deals with *bhakti*’s superiority over everything. In other words, BP 6.3.22 does not forbid offered *karma* to mean *para-dharma*, as the emphasis explained within BP 6.3.22 is different. 68  

Considering Viśvanātha’s usage of BP 6.3.22 to define the term “*para-dharma*” in BP 1.2.6 as pivotal in his argument, Kṛṣṇadeva is obliged to provide a lengthy and thorough refutation to this claim and he strives to accomplish this in numerous ways. 

### Objection 2: Viśvanātha argues that in BP 1.2.6 “**para-dharma**” is equal to “**sādhana-bhakti**” only, which subsequently would infer in BP 1.2.6 “**bhakti**” is equal to “**prema-bhakti**”

Viśvanātha claims that the term “*bhakti*” in BP 1.2.6 is characterised by *prema*, rendering it into *prema-bhakti*, and therefore *para-dharma* is *sādhana-bhakti*. The intended meaning is that by the practice of *sādhana-bhakti* one achieves the *sādya*, the goal, which is *prema-bhakti*, which is synonymous with the terms *para-dharma* and *bhakti* respectively in BP 1.2.6. This conflicts with Kṛṣṇadeva’s stance as depicted earlier. Viśvanātha once again refers to another verse in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* to validate his view point; however, Kṛṣṇadeva declares Viśvanātha’s usage of this verse inappropriate and provides references from other verses in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* to reinforce his position that “*bhakti*” in BP 1.2.6 implies *sādhana-bhakti* and not *prema-bhakti*.

1. Viśvanātha quotes BP 11.3.31 in his commentary to substantiate his perspective that *bhakti* here means *prema-bhakti*. Thus, this verse proposes that \(*sādhana-*\) *bhakti* causes \(*prema-*\) *bhakti*. Kṛṣṇadeva adopts a grammatical argument to assert that the *bhakti* referred to in BP 1.2.6 is different to that referenced in BP 11.3.31. He claims that in BP 11.3.31 the usage of *sañjātayā* as an adjective of *bhakti* indicates *bhakti* causes *bhakti*. In regard to BP 11.3.31 Kṛṣṇadeva expresses no objective to *bhakti* causing *bhakti*; however, he stresses that the situation in BP 1.2.6 is different as such an adjective is not present. 69  In other words, there is no corresponding reason to claim that *bhakti* means *prema* in BP 1.2.6, and so referring to BP 11.3.31 is inappropriate according to Kṛṣṇadeva. 
2.  Kṛṣṇadeva further argues that *bhakti* in BP 1.2.6 does not imply *prema* because it is modified by the words *ahauitiki* \(without motivation\) and *apratihata* \(uninterrupted\) which are also characteristic of a generic *sādhana*-*bhakti*. He also highlights that as BP 1.2.7 follows BP 1.2.6, and the expression “*bhakti-yoga*” appears in BP 1.2.7, this suggests that the *bhakti* described in this section is *sādhana*-*bhakti*. 70  Furthermore, BP 1.2.7 states that the consequence of *bhakti-yoga* is *jñāna* \(knowledge\) and *vairāgya* \(detachment\), characteristics which are symptomatic of *sādhana-bhakti* rather than *prema-bhakti*, as one who has reached the stage of *prema-bhakti* has already subsumed *jñāna* and *vairāgya*. By this logic, therefore, the word *bhakti* in BP 1.2.6 must refer to *sādhana-bhakti* and not *prema-bhakti* according to Kṛṣṇadeva. 
3.  Kṛṣṇadeva proceeds to propose that the direct meaning should be applied to BP 1.2.7, whereby *bhakti-yoga* means *sādhana-bhakti*, and this implies that the same *sādhana-bhakti* is the subject of BP 1.2.6. He further adds that the direct meaning is also clear in other verses such as BP 11.20.6 where *bhakti-yoga* is defined as steps to perfection. 71  For some scriptural statements the secondary meaning is suitable because the direct meaning is inappropriate in some way; however, in this instance the direct meaning is entirely acceptable in the given context. 
4.  Kṛṣṇadeva also presents other verses such as BP 3.5.13 and BP 2.3.12 that similarly illustrate how *sādhana-bhakti* leads to *jñāna* and *vairāgya*. 72  Kṛṣṇadeva invokes BP 2.3.12 in particular to argue that here *bhakti-yoga* cannot be accepted as *prema-bhakti* because of the usage of the word “*atha*,” which suggests that *bhakti* arises immediately after detachment, whereas *prema-bhakti* requires a longer duration to fructify. 73  In this case, therefore, *bhakti* must refer to *sādhana-bhakti* and not *prema-bhakti*. 

In response to Viśvanātha’s claim that the term “*bhakti*” in BP 1.2.6 is actually *prema-bhakti*, and *para-dharma* is *sādhana-bhakti*, Kṛṣṇadeva provides an extended refutation, claiming inappropriate usage of verses, non-acceptance of direct meanings and so on. Thus, he argues vehemently that “*bhakti*” in BP 1.2.6 means *sādhana-bhakti* and not *prema-bhakti*, and hence permits *para-dharma* to include the offering of *karma*.

### Objection 3: Viśvanātha argues that **bhakti** is causeless

We now turn to Kṛṣṇadeva’s final major objection, Viśvanātha’s treatment of the term “*ahautiki*” in BP 1.2.6. This expression is glossed by Viśvanātha as produced without a cause; thus, he states that *bhakti* is causeless. Therefore, *karma* cannot be a cause of *bhakti* as there is no cause; thus, *sādhana*-*bhakti* is itself the cause of *prema-bhakti* as *bhakti* is self-manifest. Viśvanātha also further quotes BP 11.12.9 and BP 3.29.11 to substantiate his claim. Kṛṣṇadeva begins his refutation by continuing with further comments on BP 2.3.12 raised earlier. *Bhakti*’s causeless nature is an important feature of Viśvanātha’s teachings and is a prevalent theme in several of his literary contributions, such as the *Mādhurya Kādambinī* and his *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* commentary.

1. Kṛṣṇadeva firstly argues that there are numerous adjectives for *bhakti-yoga* stated in BP 2.3.12 such as *guṇeṣu asaṅga*, or detachment from modes, *ātma-prasāda*, or satisfaction of the mind, *kaivalya-sammata-pathas*, or paths approved towards transcendence; after this \(“*atha*”\) comes *bhakti*. 74  This implies that once these qualities have been acquired *bhakti* manifests; thus there appears to be a cause to *bhakti*. 
2.  However, given that the self-manifest nature of *bhakti* is a core philosophical tenet of *Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava* theology, Kṛṣṇadeva is forced to admit that these corollary activities are not the exact causes of *bhakti* but rather the “*parampara*,” or distant cause. He shares an illuminating analogy to help the reader understand this idea. A practitioner of *jñāna* realises *brahman* as coverings of ignorance are removed, leading one to *nirguṇa-brahman*, although factually *brahman* is always self-manifest. Therefore, the *Upaniṣads* appear to claim that *jñāna* is the cause of *brahman* revelation, for instance, in the* Taittirīya Upaniṣad 2.1 and Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.8/6.15*, although it is simultaneously maintained that *brahman* is self-manifest. Similarly, Kṛṣṇadeva acknowledges that although *karma* can be accepted as a cause of *bhakti*, simultaneously it must be accepted that *bhakti* is self-manifest, and as such the efficacy of *karma* offered to the Lord is rooted in the grace of those who are pure \(who bestow *bhakti*\), 75  as *bhakti* from the *bhaktas* is what actually causes *bhakti* in others. 
3.  Continuing, Kṛṣṇadeva responds to Viśvanātha’s interpretation of BP 11.12.9 and BP 3.29.11 as quoted in his commentary to BP 1.2.6, which both appear to emphasise that *nirguṇa-bhakti* or absolute *bhakti* cannot be caused by anything other than *bhakti*. In response, Kṛṣṇadeva quotes a series of verses beginning with BP 3.29.11, wherein Kapiladeva depicts the nature of *nirguṇa-bhakti*, and in particular a description of prerequisites such as prescribed duties, associating with *bhaktas*, worshipping the deity and so on. Kṛṣṇadeva here argues that this passage which describes *nirguṇa-bhakti* promotes a synthesis of *karma* and *sādhana-bhakti* in the pursuit of *nirguṇa-bhakti*. He quotes HBV 11.534 to further strengthen this position. 76  Thus, in this context, *karma* can be considered a cause of *nirguṇa bhakti*. 
4.  Viśvanātha also interprets *ahautiki*, or “causeless” in BP 1.2.6, in the sense of generation. However, Kṛṣṇadeva states that Śrīdhara Svāmī indicates in his commentary to BP 1.2.6 that it alternatively means to be free from material motivations \(*phala*\). 77  Intriguingly, the root “*hetu*” can mean the cause \(generation\) and also the purpose \(motivation\). Kṛṣṇadeva supports Śrīdhara Svāmī’s reading for obvious reasons, and so *karma* conducted without motivation is *ahautiki* and a legitimate reading of the verse. 
5.  BP 11.12.9 78  is an important verse for Viśvanātha, who uses it to substantiate the proposition that *bhakti* is causeless and thus cannot arise from *karma*. To counteract this Kṛṣṇadeva argues that the term “*yam*” in BP 11.12.9 is not specifically referring to *nirguṇa-bhakti* but rather to the *prema-bhakti* of the residents of Vṛndāvana 79  as proved by the verse immediately prior BP 11.12.8 80  and thus not to *nirguṇa-bhakti*. *Vṛndāvana*-*bhakti* is very difficult to attain, even in comparison to general *bhakti*. He also references *Bhakti-sandarbha* 242 to lend further credence to this meaning of “*yam*.” 81  Therefore, as BP 11.12.9 is describing the difficulty in attaining *Vṛndāvana*-*bhakti*, and not general *bhakti*, it is inappropriate to quote this verse in this context according to Kṛṣṇadeva’s assessment. 
6.  Kṛṣṇadeva also addresses any contention regarding *karma* as a distant cause of *bhakti*, noted earlier. In BP 1.2.9, *dharma*, which is understood as *karma* in this context, is said to lead to *apavarga*, which generally translates to liberation. Kṛṣṇadeva states that according to Jīva in *Prīti-sandarbha* 18, *apavarga* can also mean love for the Supreme. Thus, irrespective of whether it is a distant cause or not, offering *karma* to the Supreme can lead to *prema-bhakti*, 82  the highest goal for *bhakti* practitioners. 

In this section Kṛṣṇadeva provides a detailed response to Viśvanātha’s claim that *bhakti* is completely causeless and consequently *karma* cannot be a cause of *bhakti* as there is no cause. Kṛṣṇadeva strongly objects to this proposition in several ways and is adamant that *karma* can be accepted as a cause of *bhakti*; intriguingly, he also admits it must also be acknowledged that *bhakti* is self-manifest. I will revisit and examine this conundrum later.

These three principal objections provide the basis for Kṛṣṇadeva’s refutation to Viśvanātha’s interpretation of BP 1.2.6. Just as Kṛṣṇadeva offered a corrective reading of an interpretation to a specific passage in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* that dismissed offered *karma* to be included in the category of *dāsyam*, we witness a similar rereading of an interpretation of a crucial verse from the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, BP 1.2.6. He begins his analysis of this verse by providing commentaries on this verse from prominent teachers of the tradition that endorse his perspective. He then initiates his refutation of Viśvanātha’s interpretation of BP 1.2.6, offering a corrective reading of the verse by drawing on the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* itself and statements by Śrīdhara Svāmī and Jīva. He attempts to dismantle Viśvanātha’s comments on the verse, refuting different elements of Viśvanātha’s arguments which discredit the possibility of *karma* leading to *bhakti*. There are three principal concerns voiced by Kṛṣṇadeva: Viśvanātha’s usage of BP 6.3.22 to define BP 1.2.6, which results in the complete exclusion of anything other than *bhakti-yoga* from being expressed as *para-dharma*; the claim that the term “*bhakti*” in BP 1.2.6 means *prema-bhakti*; and finally, Viśvanātha’s claim that *bhakti* is completely causeless. Each of these arguments stood in opposition to Kṛṣṇadeva’s objective to establish the compatibility of *karma* and *bhakti*, and thus he attempts to systematically counteract these claims with substantial references.

In concluding his refutation, Kṛṣṇadeva states that, in the same way, Viśvanātha’s explanations to some verses are flawed and thus should be re-examined. He further states in contrast, Śrīdhara’s explanations of these passages starting with BP 1.2.6 “*sa vai puṁsāṁ*” are accurate and should be followed. 83  Once again Kṛṣṇadeva does not refer to Viśvanātha by name. Kṛṣṇadeva finally quotes a lengthy series of passages from Sanatāna, Jīva and Śrīdhara to corroborate his stance that executing *karma* can lead to *bhakti*. Viśvanātha’s rejection of *karma* and *varṇāśrama* in light of *bhakti* practice is evident in other places in his *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* commentary. His position has already been highlighted in his comments to BP 1.2.6 and BP 1.2.8. A similar standpoint is adopted in his reading of BP 1.5.17 \(“Having abandoned one’s own *dharma* \(*varṇāśrama*\), worshipping Hari’s lotus feet and in an immature stage happens to fall from that position, \[be assured\] nothing inauspicious will happen to him. However, what does one who does not perform worship but follows his own *dharma* \[*varṇāśrama*\] gain?” 84 \), in this respect Viśvanātha states:
>  
> In BG 3.26 \(One should not cause confusion to the ignorant who are attached to performing activities. A learned person should act as to engage them in all sorts of *karma*  85 \), an instruction is given not to abandon *karma*. Viśvanātha acknowledges this point but argues that the instruction pertains to one on the path of *jñāna* that relies on internal cleansing whereas *bhakti* is completely independent and powerful. 86  To substantiate this view, he quotes BP 6.9.50 and BG 18.66, which indicate that one should abandon *varṇāśrama*, giving up *nitya* and *naimittika* duties and teach only *bhakti*. 87  He further adds that *karma* is prohibited even in the initial phase of *bhakti* practice 88  and provides reassurances of protection by referencing BP 11.5.41. He further states that even if one falls short of perfection or even deviates from the path of *bhakti* there is no calamity because the impressions generated by *bhakti* are imperishable and endure in a subtle shape. 89  Considering this, one should not return to the practice of *karma*. He further quotes BP 11.29.20 to support his argument. He claims that unfailingly *bhakti* will in the future sprout leaves, flowers and fruits, 90  whereas there is no reward for one who performs their own *dharmas* but does not worship the Lord. 91  

In this way, Viśvanātha discourages engagement in prescribed *karmas* declaring them to be futile and unnecessary for a *bhakti* practitioner, even if one is a novice or beginner in *bhakti* practice. Considering Viśvanātha’s disregard for the practice of *karma* for a *bhakta* according to these passages in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, Kṛṣṇadeva was obliged to refute Viśvanātha’s interpretations that jeopardised the promotion of *karma* and orthodox public conduct for members of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect. Verse BP 1.2.6 particularly became the focus of discussions on *karma*-*bhakti* relations in this period, thus Kṛṣṇadeva was tasked with refuting Viśvanātha’s problematic reading of this verse. Kṛṣṇadeva further explains:
>  
> The objection raised that *karma* is useless in \[light of\] the practice of *bhakti* is a misunderstanding of otherwise straightforward explanations. He also states that it is a flawed position as it contradicts scriptures such as *Bhāvārtha-dīpikā*,* Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī*,* Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*,* Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, the *Sandarbhas* and so on. Furthermore, it contradicts the teachings of all *sampradāyas*, therefore such interpretations should be relinquished. On account of weakness and absence of evidence, for those who aspire after ultimate meaning should not provide any veneration to this \(Viśvanātha’s interpretation\). 92  

Kṛṣṇadeva then quotes the *Mahābhārata* \(*Vana-parva 313.117*\), Viśvanātha’s *Sārārtha-darśiṇī* \(*maṅgalācaraṇa*\), Jīva’s commentary to BP 1.1.3 and Viśvanātha’s *Sārārtha-darśiṇī* commentary to BP 2.1.8 to show the importance of following the teachings of the *sampradāya* and concludes by stating that even Vaiṣṇavas in order to teach pure *bhakti* \(*suddha-bhakti*\) should perform the activities prescribed in the *varṇāśrama-dharma*, in the way taught by the Vaiṣṇava scriptures, like *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*. 93  Thus, in his conclusion to this section Kṛṣṇadeva argues that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect’s position on the function of *karma* in relation to *bhakti* should be derived from the statements of previous authorities within the *sampradāya*. Ironically, he quotes Viśvanātha twice when declaring this assertion, despite his extensive refutation of his teacher. He also references his predecessors such as Śrīdhara, Sanatāna and Jīva while constructing his refutation. By invoking the authority of these previous teachers, Kṛṣṇadeva determinedly counteracts Viśvanātha’s position, stressing that the “*para-dharma*” of verse BP 1.2.6 can and does include *karma*, and that *karma* can and does certainly lead to *bhakti*.

Several key questions are raised considering this important passage in the *Karma-vivṛti*. For instance, why does Kṛṣṇadeva not mention Viśvanātha by name during his refutation of him? At no point does he identify Viśvanātha as the *purvapaksa*, even whilst refuting his comments on this verse. In response to this conundrum, it is known that there is a code of ethics of scholarship traditionally followed, which is demonstrated by Kṛṣṇadeva in this endeavour. Kṛṣṇadeva refrains from naming his *pūrvapakṣa* as is *śāstric* convention. The practice of not naming the *pūrvapakṣa* is quite common, not only within the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, but also in other traditional *śāstric* debates and discussions. This etiquette of refutation has also been adopted by earlier teachers of the tradition. For example, in Ravi Gupta’s book he discusses the model of etiquette Jīva adopts when refuting Śrīdhara at times. 94  In this case, we also observe Kṛṣṇadeva refer to Viśvanātha explicitly only when referring to him as a positive source for substantiation; however, when opposing him he abstains from naming him and concerns himself only with the challenging views.

I would suggest that despite the apparent conflict between teacher and student on this issue, there is no indication of deterioration in the reverence and relationship between the two, and indeed Kṛṣṇadeva accedes to many of Viśvanātha’s other views on Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theology, such as the principle that *bhakti* is ultimately self-manifest, although as discussed earlier their emphasis on this matter differs. Indeed, it is also noted by Adrian Burton that Kṛṣṇadeva wrote commentaries on several important texts authored by Viśvanātha, such as the *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta*, *Stavāmṛta-laharī and Sankalpa-kalpa-druma*, 95  which in itself illustrates the respect Kṛṣṇadeva had for Viśvanātha and his teachings. Furthermore, in Kṛṣṇadeva’s opening to the commentary to *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta* he describes Viśvanātha as follows:
>  
> May the jewel-like poem that indicates the qualities of the glorious Viśvanātha who is resplendent amongst the people in the court of the King of Vṛndāvana adorn the locket which is my mind. May this be awarded quickly, also the seed of good fortune is his glance. 96  

It is clear from such statements that despite the differences of opinion on *karma* and *bhakti*, Kṛṣṇadeva maintained the utmost respect for Viśvanātha. 97  

Viśvanātha’s strong stance expressed in his *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* commentary begs the question as to why he was so intensely opposed to the practice of *karma*. Furthermore, if in his formative years Kṛṣṇadeva was a student of Viśvanātha’s, why did he and Viśvanātha have contrasting views on this issue? It is important to recognise that these two authors were communicating to vastly different audiences and communicating within vastly different environments, which no doubt influenced their compositions. Viśvanātha was the leader of a *maṭha* of ascetics in Vṛndāvana and never left Vṛndāvana even when summoned by the King. He was reclusive by nature and more than likely his primary audience was similarly divorced from society. Kṛṣṇadeva, on the other hand, having spent a short period in Vṛndāvana with his teacher, later relocated to Jaipur and served in the administration of the King as an intimate aide. As such, much of his work would have been influenced by the interests of the King, whose concerns regarding social affairs are well documented.

Intriguingly, even though Kṛṣṇadeva vigorously argues that *karma* leads to *bhakti*, he acknowledges that *bhakti* is ultimately self-manifest or causeless. Kṛṣṇadeva’s efforts therefore aim to denounce an irresponsible application of this principle, whereby Vaiṣṇavas withdraw from the world to pursue uninhibitedly the practice of chanting and hearing about Kṛṣṇa, abandoning their social responsibilities in the process. We can assume Kṛṣṇadeva considers such a view as dangerous because it would provide justification for unorthodox practices resulting in social disruption and spiritual degradation for the general populace. This was a major concern for Jaisingh II, who was alert to the need for social stability and responsibility, as demonstrated by his reformation endeavours such as the construction of a colony known as *Vairāgyapura* intended to encourage wayward *sādhus* to adopt a *gṛhastra* lifestyle. 98  

## Can **karma** cause **bhakti** considering **bhakti** is self-manifest?

As discussed earlier, Kṛṣṇadeva acknowledges that *bhakti* is self-manifest, as established by Viśvanātha, and therefore does not essentially require *karma* or anything else for that matter to generate it. However, Kṛṣṇadeva also argues in support of *karma*, claiming it leads to *bhakti* and thus is conducive and supportive for the aspirations of a *bhakti* practitioner. This apparent contradiction presented a dilemma for aspiring *bhaktas* who sought to reconcile the two processes.

In examining this topic further, I will explore a pivotal verse that is frequently shared to illustrate how *karma* can lead to *bhakti*. This verse appeared earlier in Viśvanātha’s comments to BP 1.2.8 and BG 3.9. In BP 11.20.11 it is stated: “In this very life situated in one’s duty according to *varṇāśrama*, free from sin and pure, one obtains pure knowledge or by chance \(*yadṛcchayā*\) *bhakti* unto me.” 99  It appears from this verse that *karma* can indeed cause *bhakti*. Viśvanātha admits there is some truth to this but notes that the usage of the expression *yadṛcchayā* indicates “by itself,” and therefore concludes that *bhakti* is self-manifest and not even *niskāma-karma* \(the purest form of action\) is the cause of *bhakti*. 100  Therefore the term “*yadṛcchayā*” is of critical importance in clarifying *bhakti*’s self-manifest nature. This very expression also features in another verse slightly earlier, BP 11.20.8, *yadṛcchayā mat-kathadau*, “if somehow or other a person hears about me and so on.” The usage of the word “*yadṛcchayā*” 101  in both instances indicates that *bhakti* is independent, thus having no cause and for our purposes implies *karma* or one’s pious acts cannot be the cause of *bhakti*.

Considering the causeless nature of *bhakti* as a fundamental notion within Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theology, Kṛṣṇadeva is forced to acknowledge that *karma* is not the direct cause of *bhakti* in the* Karma-vivṛti*. However, he maintains it is a cause, albeit a “distant cause.” He shares an example from the Advaita tradition to help the reader understand how *karma* and *bhakti* remain closely connected. According to the tradition a practitioner of *jñāna* realises *brahman* by the removal of the coverings of ignorance, which leads to *nirguṇa brahman*, although in reality *brahman* is self-manifest. Kṛṣṇadeva refers to key verses invoked by Advaitin teachers, such as *Taittirīya Upaniṣad 2.1 and Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.8/6.15*, which convey the function of *jñāna* in attaining *brahman* for the tradition. These verses propose that by knowing *brahman* one attains *brahman*; for example, *Taittirīya Upaniṣad 2.1* states:
>  
> One who knows *brahman* gains the highest there is. Truth, knowledge, the infinite is *brahman*, one who knows them hidden in the cave of the heart, in the highest heaven, attains all desires, along with *brahman*. 102  

And in the *Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad* both 3.8 and 6.15 states:
>  
> Only by knowing him \(*brahman*\) can one transcend death, there exists no other path to go there. 103  

In his comments to* Bhagavad-gītā* 18.66, Shankara, a renowned Advaitin teacher, helps us to further understand how *jñāna* plays a pivotal role in attaining *brahman* yet does not compromise *brahman*’s independent nature. He begins by explaining that action and likewise the combination of knowledge and action is dismissed as a means to truth, and rather only exclusive knowledge leads to the highest truth. In response to a possible objection that even exclusive knowledge is purposeless, Shankara replies:
>  
> No. It destroys ignorance and is seen to conclude in liberation. Knowledge that destroys the darkness of ignorance is seen as concluding in the result of liberation. \[Similarly,\] The result of the light of a lamp destroys the darkness of ignorance about the snake and so on, and the \[darkness\] from the object of the rope and so on. Indeed, the result of the light culminates in only the rope after the false notion of a snake and so on have disappeared. So is the case of knowledge. 104  

This passage from Shankara reinforces the idea that knowledge only serves to remove ignorance and not to cause the manifestation of *brahman*. The example of the snake and the rope often features in Shankara’s writings. In this analogy, the rope remains always present and the light of the lamp \(knowledge\) simply removes the darkness \(ignorance\) to unveil the rope’s true nature, consequently not mistaking it for a snake. Similarly, it is not that knowledge awakens *brahman* or manifests *brahman* but rather removes the dualities which are superimposed on the self by ignorance. The self, which is synonymous with *brahman*, is ever present, just as the rope is present despite being mistakenly identified as a snake. Therefore, it is not the knowledge of the scriptures or the revealed texts that leads to knowing the self or *brahman*, as it is already familiar and self-evident. Therefore, the objective of works such as the Upaniṣads is not to familiarise one with one’s own self, *brahman*, but simply to eradicate the fictitious dualities such as “happiness and distress,” “love and hate” and so on that we misidentify with. The *neti neti*, “not this, not this” is a method of negation that is adopted within the Advaita tradition which illustrates the role of knowledge. Adopting this method, the Advaita practitioner is able to negate identification with all things of this world which are not *brahman* and one continues to do so until nothing remains other than the self or *brahman*. Ultimately, the *neti neti* approach negates all descriptions of the absolute truth other than truth itself. In regard to the example of the rope, although it is perceived loosely, due to the darkness the image of a snake is superimposed upon it. And therefore, although there is the vague inherent understanding of the self, by removing the superimpositions one is able to develop complete and factual understanding. 105  

Similarly, *karma* acts as an aid and is not the direct cause of *bhakti*. Earlier it was described that Jīva references the example of BP 11.3.23 in his *Bhakti-sandarbha* to explain that the act of detaching the mind from matter of itself is not *bhakti*; however, when employed in the pursuit of *bhakti* it is, from one perspective, considered non-different to *bhakti*. Similarly, *karma*, when offered to the Supreme, is transformed by the motivation of *bhakti* and classified as *āropa-siddhā* or *saṅga-siddhā*, which are valid forms of *bhakti* according to Jīva. Although I will explore Viśvanātha’s commentary on the *Gītā* further in Chapter 5 of this book, his comments on BG 7.28 are particularly insightful on this current topic. A literal reading of this verse BG 7.28 \(In contrast, those persons who performed pious acts, whose violations of *dharma* have come to an end, they worship me with determination, being freed from delusion due to duality 106 \) suggests that pious acts or *karma* lead to *bhakti*. However, Viśvanātha clarifies in his comments that one should not commit the error of inferring from this verse that *karma* causes *bhakti*; nevertheless, he illustrates the precise way in which *karma* is beneficial in the pursuit of *bhakti*, by stating:
>  
> Then who are eligible for *bhakti*? Here it is said that those who execute pious acts, who have ended violations of *dharma* although not completely, this is the meaning. There is an increase of the qualities of *sattva* \(goodness\) and there is a decline in the qualities of *tama* \(ignorance\). When that is the case, delusion, which is its effect, that also declines. Indeed, when delusion declines, they are without excessive attachment, consequently by the spontaneous association of *bhaktas* they only worship me. They become completely free from sin by the constant practice of worship and so on. Those who by being freed from the remaining illusion become determined in vows, they gain steadiness in worshipping me, and thus, one should not think that only pious activity is the cause of *bhakti* which gives everything. \[He then quotes BP 11.12.9:\] Even though one engages with effort in the *sāṇkhya* system, *yoga*, charity, vows, penances, sacrifices, teaching of Vedas, self-study of the Vedas, or renunciation, still one cannot obtain me. It is explained in several places that pious acts and so on are dependent on pure *bhakti*, and not its cause. 107   

In Viśvanātha’s comments to BG 7.28, he stresses that *karma* should not be mistaken to be the cause of *bhakti*. However, he acknowledges that pious *karma* may facilitate one on the path of *bhakti*, accepting the literal truth of this verse \(BG 7.28\). He accomplishes this by postulating that *karma* performs a secondary role in attracting the association of *bhaktas*, which actually leads to *bhakti*. He indicates that there are inclinations and dispositions that are conducive to receive *bhakti* from the *bhaktas*, specifically those persons who imbibe a *sattvic* disposition. This tempts me to propose that this viewpoint contrasts specific comments on the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* made by Viśvanātha in his *Sārārtha-darśiṇī*, examined earlier in BP 1.2.6, BP 1.2.8 and BP 1.5.17. Within his elucidations on these *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* verses he appears to proclaim that there are no conditions required to obtaining *bhakti* and consequently, the function of *karma* is irrelevant and insignificant even at the very beginning of *bhakti* practice. Jonathan Edelmann provides further insights into Viśvanātha’s stance in his article, “The Cause of Devotion in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Theology”:
>  
> There are some qualifications \(*adhikāra*\) for *bhakti*, but under the general category of *adhikāra* we might distinguish “genealogical-qualifications” for *bhakti* \(e.g., *varṇa*,* āśrama*,* jāti*,* janma*,* puṇyakarma*, etc.\), of which there are none, and “dispositional-qualifications” for *bhakti* \(e.g., lack of excessive attachment, lack of excessive detachment\), of which there are some. 108  

Jonathan Edelmann also refers to BP 11.20.8, which reveals that an individual who attains *bhakti* spontaneously \(*yadṛcchayā*\) is “not despondent and not excessively attached.” Therefore, we can extrapolate that there are certain qualities that are significant for a receiver of *bhakti* to cultivate, to be a fit recipient of *bhakti*. Therefore, the practice of *karma* is conducive for the manifestation of these qualifying attributes for a practitioner and can therefore be considered an important component to receive *bhakti*, although not necessarily essential and certainly not the direct cause.

So, then, what is the direct cause? In Viśvanātha’s commentary it is said that *bhakti* is bestowed by the *bhaktas*, who operate as vessel carriers of *bhakti*. Alluding to the same point, Kṛṣṇadeva also suggests that the effectiveness or potency of *karma* is dependent upon the grace of those who are pure, 109  referring to the pure *bhaktas*. A similar proposition is outlined by Viśvanātha, who offers the following comments to BG 3.2 \(“You seem to bewilder my intelligence with your mixed instructions. Therefore, speak one thing, having decided how I can attain a better condition” 110 \):
>  
> O my friend Arjuna, it is true that *bhakti* which is beyond the *guṇas* \(goodness, passion and ignorance\) is best of all. However, since that \(*bhakti*\) is gained by the mercy of my great, unalloyed *bhakta* by chance, it is not attained through human exertions. Therefore, the blessing is given to you, transcend the *guṇas* by transcendental *bhakti* unto me. When you see the result of this blessing, then you will attain by the mercy of my unalloyed *bhakta* by chance, however now you are only eligible for action. 111  

It is clear from the above passage 112  that this spontaneous arousal of *bhakti* is dependent upon receiving compassion from a sincere *bhakta*. In other words, *bhakti* arises from the grace of a *bhakta*, and therefore the grace of a *bhakta* appears to be the actual cause of *bhakti*. However, to counteract this claim and to maintain the causeless status of *bhakti*, Viśvanātha states the following in the *Mādhurya Kādambinī*:
>  
> \(BP 11.2.46\) The intermediate *bhakta* exhibits love for the Lord, friendship to those that depend on the Lord, compassion to the innocent and neglects the envious. So, the intermediate *bhakta* exhibits partiality and because the Lord is obedient to His *bhakta*, his compassion follows the compassion of His *bhakta*, there is nothing improper in this. Now, the cause of the compassion of a *bhakta* is *bhakti* itself existing within his heart. As without this, there is no possibility of the appearance of compassion. Thus, *bhakti*’s own manifestation \(self -manifestation\) is certainly established. \[Thus, only *bhakti* causes *bhakti*\]. 113  

In this way, Viśvanātha explains how *bhakti* upholds its causeless characteristic, as *bhakti* triggers the grace that a *bhakta* displays. So, if this is the case, what precise function does the practice of *karma* have, if any? To answer this question, I will describe the proclivities of three classes of *bhaktas*, namely, the neophyte, the intermediate and the advanced \(*prakṛta*, *madhyama*, and *uttama*\). 114  Neophytes are rarely inspired to give *bhakti* to others. Rather, they are self-centred, concerned primarily with their own advancement. In contrast, the vision of the *uttama-bhaktas* is so elevated that they see everyone, even those materially engrossed, as fully engaged in *bhakti*; therefore, they feel no need to express their compassion. The distribution of *bhakti* is therefore typically regarded as the domain of the intermediate *bhaktas* as demonstrated in the *Mādhurya Kādambinī* passage. The intermediate *bhakta*s engage with others through careful discrimination; they love the Supreme, make friendships with the *bhaktas*, avoid the envious and gift the opportunity for *bhakti* to the innocent. For this reason, some persons receive *bhakti* and others do not. However, as Viśvanātha clarifies, *bhakti* itself causes compassion in the intermediate *bhakta*, who is then empowered to bestow *bhakti* upon the innocent. Who then is considered “innocent”? becomes a crucial question. The term used to denote the innocent is “*baliśa*,” which can also mean “naïve,” “simple” or “childlike.” The “*sattva*” qualities of the recipient qualify him or her to be considered amongst the “innocent,” and as described earlier the adoption of *karma-yoga* helps to bring an individual to this state. Therefore, based on this analysis, although *bhakti* is self-manifest and independent, pious activities or *karma* allow one to cultivate and manifest a *sattvic* disposition, which enables one to be a suitable receiver of the *madhyama bhakta*’s grace as they are the carriers of *bhakti*. Therefore, in consideration of the manner in which *bhakti* is transferred, *karma* plays a critical role in leading to *bhakti*. 

## Conclusion

In this period, we notice a significant development within the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, which attempts to address the concerns regarding the practicality, accessibility and authenticity of its ideals within the public sphere. In other words, attention is given to how a *bhakti* practitioner operates in the public arena; this is likely to have been escalated by the political influences of the day. In response, numerous pertinent texts, such as the *Karma-vivṛti*, emerge to promote a system of integration or interaction with the socio-political circumstances of the time.

In the *Karma-vivṛti*, Kṛṣṇadeva establishes the function and benefit of the practice of *karma* in the pursuit of *bhakti*, arguing authoritatively that *karma* offered to the Supreme is itself a form of *bhakti*. He substantiates this conclusion by drawing on references from the most prominent teachers in the tradition’s lineage, and authoritatively providing corrective readings of key passages crucial for the promotion of *karma*’s value in relation to the practice of *bhakti*. Alongside a key passage in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* 1.2.6 proves to be a critical verse for Kṛṣṇadeva that exemplifies the potential synthesis of *karma* and *bhakti*, and he goes to great lengths to propagate this view, even to the extent of refuting his own guru and teacher from Vṛndāvana. Viśvanātha on the other hand seems to offer a more accommodating position on *karma* for the *bhakti* aspirant in his *Bhagavad*-*gītā* commentary. His early thoughts demonstrated by his commentary to specific verses on the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* appear to dismiss in no uncertain terms any question of *karma*’s utility on the path of the *bhakti* practitioner. However, in his commentary on the *Gītā*, he unveils an apparent softening stance towards *karma*, accommodating its role and value for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava practitioner. 

A significant tenet of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theology, which both Viśvanātha and Kṛṣṇadeva agree on, is the notion that *bhakti* is ultimately self-manifest. This precept dismisses the idea that *karma* can be a direct cause of *bhakti*; nevertheless, upon further examination it is established that the practice of *karma* plays a vital function in preparing one to be an eligible recipient of *bhakti*. From this perspective, executing injunctions pertaining to *karma* can be considered intrinsic to the development of *bhakti*. In the following chapter I will continue our exploration of *karma*-*bhakti* relations, investigating the exact jurisdiction of *karma* for a *bhakti* practitioner and the function of notions such as *lokasaṅgraha* in determining one’s obligation to engage in *karma*. I will examine these themes primarily through the work of *Karmādhikāra-nirnaya*, which is another critical text on *karma* commissioned by Jaisingh II in this period.

## Notes

1.  Dharma is a term that’s notoriously difficult to define; its Sanskrit root *dhṛ*, “to hold” or “to support,” provides some indication of its meaning. Indeed, a wide spectrum of meanings is attributed to the term, such as law, universal order or religion in general. Thus, according to the context, whether historical or religious, a specific meaning may dominate. However, regardless of which meaning is used according to the setting, it is assumed that the other definitions are implicitly included \(Ingo Strauch, “Dharma,” in Knut A. Jacobsen, Ed., *Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism* \(Boston, 2010\), p. 736\). 
2.  Ingo Strauch, “Dharma,” p. 737. 
3.  The stem of the noun is *karman* and *karma* is the nominative singular form. The term is derived from the Sanskrit verb *kṛ*, which means “to do, to make, perform, cause, undertake”; in other words it denotes an action. 
4.  Y. Krishan, *The Doctrine of Karma* \(Delhi, 1997\), p. 4. 
5.  yajña vai karma. 
6.  yajña vai śreṣṭhatamam karma. 
7.  Krishan, *The Doctrine of Karma*, p. 167. 
8.  The first, *nitya-karma*, means a constant or continual act, such as the execution of the *pañcamahā-yajñas* \(five great sacrifices\) or any daily rite, such as the *agnihotra*. On the other hand, *naimittika-karma* denotes an occasional act or special act to be performed, such as *samskāras*, birth ceremony, marriage, *śraddha* ceremony and so on. The third type of act, *kāmya-karma*, means optional or dispensable acts, inspired by desires to fulfil some material ambition. And finally, *niṣiddha-karma* denotes forbidden acts described in scriptures and those acts that run counter to established social norms such as theft, killing brahmins and so on. 
9.  Krishan, *The Doctrine of Karma*, p. 160. 
10.  Julius Lipner, “Karman,” in Knut A. Jacobsen, Ed., *Brill’s Encyclopedia of Hinduism* \(Boston, 2010\), p. 781. 
11.  These compilations exemplify his devotion to Rāma in his early life \(Gopal Narayan Bahura, *Literary Heritage of the Rulers of Amber and Jaipur* \(Jaipur, 1976\), p. 62\). 
12.  Bahura, *Literary Heritage of the Rulers of Amber and Jaipur*, p. 60. 
13.  The role of *jñāna* within the tradition has been explored by authors: \(Gupta, * Caitanya Vaiṣṇava Vedānta of Jīva Gosvāmī*\) and \(Okita, *Hindu theology in early modern South Asia*\). 
14.  anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṃ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṃ bhaktir uttamā. 
15.  karma cātra smṛty-ādy-uktaṃ nitya-naimittikādi na tu bhajanīya-paricaryyādi tasya tad-anuśīlana-rūpatvāt. 
16.  \(CC\(CC 2.8.54–55\) pp. 434–435. 
17.  \(CC\(CC 2.8.54–75\) pp. 434–440. 
18.  \(CC\(CC 2.9.238–239\) pp. 475–476. 
19.  \(CC\(CC 2.9.240–241\) p. 476. 
20.  \(CC\(CC 2.9.242\) p. 476. 
21.  \(CC\(CC 2.9.242 – *śloka* 21–23\) pp. 476–477. 
22.  \(CC\(CC 2.9.247–248\) p. 477. 
23.  BNK Sharma, an important scholar on the Mādhva school, criticises the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* for misrepresenting and misunderstanding the actual position of Mādhva. \(B. N. K. Sharma, *History of the Dvaita School of Vedānta and Its Literature* \(Delhi, 2000\), p. 526\). 
24.  nārada uvāca, pārāśarya mahā-bhāga bhavataḥ kaccid ātmanā parituṣyati śārīra ātmā mānasa eva vā. 
25.  nārada uvāca, bhavatānudita-prāyaṁ yaśo bhagavato ‘malam yenaivāsau na tuṣyeta manye tad darśanaṁ khilam. 
26.  dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo ‘tra paramo nirmatsarāṇāṁ satāṁ vedyam … 
27.  sarvān nitya-naimittikādi-karma-lakṣaṇān parityajya sarvarthā tyaktvā mām ekaṃ śaraṇaṃ vraja mad-eka-niṣṭho bhavety arthaḥ | yadvā śaraṇāgatatvamātreṇāpi mām ekam āśraya kim utaikāntitvena nanu vihitākaraṇena pāpaṃ syāt tatrāha sarvebhyo vihitākaraṇajebhyaḥ kathañcin niṣiddhācaraṇajebhyaś ca tathā saṃsāra-duḥkha-kāraṇa-karma-rūpebhyaḥ tad-vāsanādi-rūpebhyo ‘pi pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmīti | ataḥ mā śucaḥ | \(Johnathan B. Edelmann, “The Antinomian Devotee,” American Oriental Society, Conference Paper, March 2015, p. 3\). 
28.  karma-yoga-jñāna-yoga-bhakti-yoga-rūpān sarvān dharmān parama-niśśreyasa-sādhana-bhūtān, mad-ārādhanatvena atimātra-prītyā yathādhikāraṃ kurvāṇa eva, ukta-rītyā phala-karma-kartṛtvādi-parityāgena parityajya \(Svami Adidevananda, *Śri Rāmānuja Gītā Bhāṣya* \(Mylapore, 2007\), p. 598\). 
29.  Rembert Lutjeharms, “Aesthetics,” in Ravi Gupta, Ed., *Caitanya Vaiṣṇava Philosophy* \(London, 2007\), p. 196. 
30.  Burton, *Temples*,* Texts and Taxes*, p. 68. 
31.  The *Karma-vivṛti* that I refer to and translate is derived from an edited Sanskrit manuscript from Monika Horstmann’s German book *Der Zusammenhalt der Welt* \(pp. 218–290\), originally sourced from the Man Singh Museum in the City Palace of Jaipur. 
32.  karmaṇo bhagavat-sāmmukhyatvaṃ ca tad-ājñā-pālana-rūpatvena tad-arpitatvādinā ca karaṇāt, tad-asāṃmukhya-rūpatvaṃ ca tad-abhāvāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 220\). 
33.  teṣām eva bahir-mukhyatvaṃ nānyeṣām iti bodhyam, nindā tu tasyaiva śrūyate na tu bhagavad-arpitādi karmaṇah \(Monika Horstmann, p. 220\). 
34.  bhakti-rūpatvāt sākṣād eva śuddha-bhakti-sādhanatvāt paramparayā bhāva-bhakti-sādhanatvāc ca \(Monika Horstmann, p. 220\). 
35.  ca tasya dvayasyaiva dvāra-bhūtaṃ karmārpaṇa-rūpam iti \(Monika Horstmann, p. 221\). 
36.  tatra varṇāśramācāravatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān viṣṇu ārādhyate paṇthā nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam iti parāśaroktyā. 
37.  śruti-smṛte mamaivājñe yas te ullaṇghya vartate ājñā-cchedī mama dveṣī mad-bhakto ‘pi na vaisṇava iti śrī-bhagavad-uktyā ca. 
38.  śrī rāmāya namaḥ. śrīmad-rājādhirājānām ājñayā karma-śuddhaye, natvā caitanya-pādāñ ca karmaṇāṃ vivṛtiḥ kṛtā. \(Monika Horstmann, p. 218\). 
39.  dāsyaṃ karmārpaṇaṃ tasya kaiṅkaryam api sarvathā | tatrādyaṃ yathā skānde, tasmin samarpitaṃ karma svābhāvikam apīśvare, bhaved bhāgavato dharmas tat-karma kimutārpitam iti | karma svābhāvikaṃ bhadraṃ japa-dhyānārcanādi ca, itīdaṃ dvividhaṃ kṛṣṇe vaiṣṇavair dāsyam arpitam | mṛdu-śraddhasya kathitā svalpā karmādhikāritā, tad-arpitaṃ harau dāsyam iti kaiścid udīryata iti | \(Monika Horstmann, p. 223\). 
40.  This section of the text is describing *sādhana-bhakti*, and therefore *dāsyam* here refers to one of the nine kinds of devotional service \(BP 7.5.23\) and not to the *rasa* itself. 
41.  BRS 1.2.183 Jīva’s comments: karmārpaṇam ity anūdya dāsyam iti vidhīyate, tad etac cānya-matam, sva-matam tu kaiṅkaryam iti, tac ca kiṅkaro ‘smīti abhimānaḥ. 
42.  BRS 1.2.185 Jīva’s comments: tat-tad-varṇāśramādy-upādhi-svabhāva-prāptaṃ. 
43.  mṛdv iti | kaiścit śrīdhara-svāmi-prabhṛtibhis tat svalpam karma arpitam sat. 
44.  Śrīdhara Svāmī is deeply admired and held in high regard in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect as the original commentator of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, upon his exposition other teachers in the tradition formulated their commentaries. He is frequently referenced in the works of the principal teachers of the sect. 
45.  yady api karmārpaṇasya dāsyatvaṃ na saṃmataṃ tathāpi bhāgavata-dharmatvaṃ tu siddhām eva tad eva hi bhakti-rūpatvam \(Monika Horstmann, p. 223\). 
46.  sā bhaktis trividhā āropa-siddhā saṅga-siddhā svarūpa-siddhā ca, tatrāropa-siddhā svato bhaktitvābhāve ‘pi bhagavad-arpaṇādinā bhaktitvaṃ prāptā karmādi-rūpā, saṅga-siddhā svatobhaktitvābhāve ‘pi tat-parikaratayā saṃsthāpanena tatra bhāgavatān dharmān śikṣed ityādi prakaraṇeṣu sarvato manaso ‘saṅgam ityādinā labdha-tad-antaḥ pātā jñāna-karma-tad-aṇgarūpā ityādy anantaram \(Monika Horstmann, p. 226\). 
47.  tatra yadṛcchika-ceṣṭayāpi bhagavad-arpitatvena bhagavad-dharmatvaṃ bhavati kimuta vaidika-karmaṇa iti tasyā api tad-rūpatvam āha kāyena vācā manasendriyair vā buddhy-ātmanā vānusṛta-svabhāvāt, karoti yad yat sakalaṃ parasmai nārāyaṇāyeti samarpayet tat ityādi \(Monika Horstmann, p. 226\). 
48.  BP 7.5.23. 
49.  Horstmann, “Theology and Statecraft,” p. 58. 
50.  atha bhagavad-arpita-karmādeḥ śuddha-bhakti-hetutve pramāṇāni yathā śrī-bhāgavate, sa vai puṃsāṃ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā saṃprasīdati \(Monika Horstmann, p. 227\). 
51.  Kṛṣṇadeva also promoted the *svakīyā* view, in contrast to Viśvanātha who promoted the *parakīyā* view. The debate became an important topic during the reign of Jaisingh II. Jaisingh II had sent Kṛṣṇadeva to Bengal to convince them of the *svakīyā* doctrine over the *parakīyā* doctrine, whereas Viśvanātha compiled a text known as the *Svakīyātva-nirāsa-vicāra* or the refutation of *svakīyā-vāda* philosophy, advocating explicitly the *parikīyā-vāda* proposition. It appears that there were several tenets of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theology that they held differing viewpoints upon. 
52.  yat tu sa puṃsāṃ puṃmātrāṇām eva dharmaḥ paraḥ paramaḥ śravaṇa-kīrtanādi lakṣaṇaḥ, yad uktaṃ etāvān eva loke ‘smin puṃsāṃ dharmaḥ paraḥ smṛtaḥ bhakti-yogo bhagavati tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhir ityataḥ, para-śabda-viśeṣyo dharmo bhakti-yoga eva bhaved iti, tathātra vatup-pratyayenaiva kāreṇa caitad anyasya parama-dharma-pada-vācyatvaṃ niṣiddhaṃ, yato bhaktiḥ prema-lakṣaṇā bhavet, ahaitukī hetuṃ vinaivotpadyamānā iti, saguṇā vyāvṛttetyādi \(Monika Horstmann, p. 229\). 
53.  tatra śravaṇa-kīrtanādi-lakṣaṇatvaṃ kutaḥ prāptam, arthād iti cet yad uktam ityādi hetūpanyāsānupapattiḥ yad uktam ityādikam etat sādhakam iti cet tad api na \(Monika Horstmann, p. 230\). 
54.  etāvān ity asya paścād uktatvena sa vai puṃsām ity asya prāthamikatvenāpūrvatvāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 230\). 
55.  sa ity asya yato bhaktir adhokṣaja ityādeś cānartha-vākyāpatteś ca \(Monika Horstmann, p. 230\). 
56.  This argument by Kṛṣṇadeva is quite radical considering the three levels of *bhakti* described by Rūpa Gosvāmī in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.1*, which although distinct are all categorised as *bhakti*. According to Rūpa there is devotion in practice \(*sādhana-bhakti*\), devotion with emotion \(*bhāva-bhakti*\) and devotion with love \(*prema-bhakti*\). Although, the first stage is considered devotion in practice and the last two stages are considered to be *sādhya-bhakti* or the devotion to be attained, they are all categorised as *bhakti*. 
57.  dharma-śabdena veda-praṇihito dharma ity atra, dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhita ity atra, atah puṃbhir ityādau svanutiṣṭhasya dharmasyety atra dharmasya hy āpavargasyety atra dharma-śāstrādau ca śataśas tathā pratītir varṇāśramācāra-lakṣaṇasyaivopasthityā \(Monika Horstmann, p. 231\). 
58.  bhakti-padena ca notpādayed yadi ratim ityādi vyatirekokty anurodhena ­prathamopasthitatvena ca kathā-ruci-lakṣaṇāyā bhakti-ṛūpa-sthityā ca, asaṅgatatvāpattiś ca na ca vyatirekokter anyārthaḥ saṅgacchate \(Monika Horstmann, p. 231\). 
59.  viṣvaksena kathāṣu ratiṃ notpādayet karmaṇā pitṛloka iti śruteḥ. 
60.  tasmāt sva-dharmaṃ tyaktvā śravaṇa-kīrtanādi-lakṣaṇaḥ pūrvoktaḥ paro dharma evānuṣṭheya. 
61.  asmil loke vartamānaḥ sva-dharmastho ‘naghaḥ śuciḥ jñānam viśuddham āpnoti mad-bhaktiḥ vā yadṛcchayā. 
62.  yadṛcchā svairitety abhidhānāt kaṣṭa-kalpanayā vyākhyānantare bhakteḥ sva-prakāśatvaṃ na siddhed iti tad anādṛtam ity ato niṣkāmo ‘pi karma-yogo na bhakter hetur ity āha. 
63.  yadīti garhāyāṃ śrama-janakatād garhitety arthaḥ, yadi garhā-vikalpayor iti medinī. 
64.  yadi vedāḥ pramāṇam. 
65.  dhatte padam tvam avitā yadi vighna-mūrdhni. 
66.  atra yadīti śabdo niścaye iti śrī-swāmi-caraṇānāṃ vyākhyānāc ca. 
67.  na ca etāvān evetyādinā tad-anyasya parama-dharma-śabda-vācyatā-niṣedhaḥ kriyate, kintu bhakti-yogasya sarvotkṛṣṭa-dharmatvaṃ vidhīyate, anyathā para-dharmo ‘nyacodita ity atra para-dharmo bhayāvaha ity ādāv api para-dharma-pada-vācya-niṣedhaḥ syāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 232\). 
68.  na ca bhagavad-arpita-karmādeḥ parama-dharmatva svīkāre etāvān eva ity evakārāsaṅgati, samāna-viṣayatvābhāvāt, yato ‘tra para-śabdena dharmah svanuṣṭhita iti vyatirekoktyā dharmeṣv evāsya śreṣṭhavyaṃ bodhyate na tv anya-sarvotkṛṣṭatvam, etāvān ity atra tu sarvotkṛṣṭatvam eva \(Monika Horstmann, p. 235\). 
69.  kiṃ ca, yato bhaktiḥ prema-lakṣaṇety apy anupapannam, tasyā upasthāpakābhāvāt, na ca bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyety uktibhir bhakti-padam eva tasyā upasthāpakam iti vācyam, tatra bhaktyā sañjātayeti viśeṣaṇa-viśiṣṭasya bhakti-padasya atra tu tad-abhāvāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 232\). 
70.  anya-viśeṣaṇānāṃ sādhana-bhakti-sādhāraṇatvāt, agrima-padye bhakti-yoga-padopanyāsena tan-nirākaraṇāc ca \(Monika Horstmann, p. 233\). 
71.  na ca tatrāpi bhakti-yoga-padasya yogās trayo mayā proktā nṝṇāṃ śreyo vidhitsayā, jñānaṃ karma bhaktiś ca nopāyo ‘nyo ‘sti kutracid ity ādy ukta-mukhyārtha-bādhakaṃ tad-upasthāpakaṃ ca kiṃcid asti \(Monika Horstmann, p. 233\). 
72.  sā śraddhadhānasya vivardhamānā viraktim anyatra karoti puṃsa ity ādau jñānaṃ yad āprati-nivṛtta-guṇormi-cakram ātma-prasāda uta yatra guṇeṣv asaṇgaḥ, kaivalya-sammata-pathas tv atha bhakti-yogaḥ ko nivṛtto hari-kathāsu ratiṃ na kuryād ity ādau ca sādhana-bhakter api jñāna-vairāgya-janakatva-śruteḥ, janayaty āśu vairāgyam ity ādau vairāgyādi-janakatvasyāpi sādhana-bhakti-sādhāraṇatvāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 233\). 
73.  na ca kaivalya-sammata-pathas tv atha bhakti-yoga ity ādau kevala-bhakti-yoga-padenāpi prema-bhaktir ukteti vācyam, tatrāpy atha-pada-samabhivyāhārāt, atha-śabdasyānantaryārthatvāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 234\). 
74.  kaivalyetyādi viśeṣaṇāc ca ahaitukī hetuṃ vinaivotpadyamānety api na saṅgacchate, hetoḥ prabala-vacanaḥ suṣṭhu pratipādayitum ārabdhatvāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 234\). 
75.  na ca bhakteḥ sva-prakāśatva-hāny-āpattiḥ, brahma-vid-āpnoti paraṃ tam eva viditvātimṛtyumeti nānyaḥ panthā ‘yanāyetyādinā jñānasya brahmāvirbhāva-kāraṇatve ‘pi yathā tatra tad-āvaraṇa-bhaṇgam ādāyaiva kārya-kāraṇa-bhāvān na tasya sva-prakāśatva-hānis tathā tatrāpi bhakty-āvaraṇa-bhaṇge tātparyāt, bhakti-mātra kāmanayārpita-karmādeḥ sat-kṛpā-mūlakatvāc ca, sat-kṛpāyāś ca svatantratvaṃ sva-rūpa-śakti-vilāsatvaṃ ca taiḥ svīkṛtam eveti \(Monika Horstmann, p. 234\). 
76.  yato bhaktir ity anena ca tādṛśa dharmasyāpi śuddha-bhaktiḥ phalam iti mahānavirodhaḥ, nanu dāna-vrata-tapo-homa-karmādikaṃ jñānāṇga-bhūtāyāḥ sātvikyā eva bhakte kathaṃcid dhetur bhavatu, na tu nirguṇāyāḥ, yaṃ na sāṇkhyena yogena dāna-vrata-tapo ‘dhvaraiḥ, vyākhyā-svādhyāya-sannyāsaiḥ prāpnuyād yatnavān apīty ekādaśenoktir iti cen na, mad-guṇa-śruti-mātreṇa mayi sarva-guhāśaye mano-gatir avicchinnā yathā gaṇgāmbhaso ‘mbudhau, lakṣaṇaṃ bhakti-yogasya nirguṇasya hy udāhṛtam, ahaituky avyavahitā yā bhaktiḥ puruṣottama ity ādy ukta-lakṣaṇāyā nirguṇāyā bhakter eva niṣevitānimittena sva-dharmeṇa mahīyasetyādy ukta-sva-dharmādīnāṃ mad-dharmaṇo guṇair etaiḥ parisaṃśuddha āśayaḥ puruṣasyāñjasābhyeti śruta-mātra-guṇaṃ hi mām ity anena janma-koṭi-sahasreṣu ity ādinā ca \(Monika Horstmann, p. 235\). 
77.  kāraṇatvokteḥ, na ca ahaitukīti kathaṃ saṇgacchateti, vācyaṃ hetuḥ phalābhisaṃdhānaṃ tad-rahiteti śrīdhara-svāmi-prabhṛti-vyākhyānāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 236\). 
78.  yam na yogena sāṇkhyena dāna-vrata-tapo ‘dhvaraiḥ vyākhyā-svādhyāya-sannyāsaiḥ prāpnuyād yatnavān api \(Even though one engages with effort in the *sāṇkhya* system, yoga, charity, vows, penances, sacrifices, teaching of Vedas, self-study of the Vedas, or renunciation, still one cannot obtain me\). 
79.  nanu yaṃ na sāṇkhyenetyādy ekādaśoktiḥ kā gatir iti ced gatiḥ spaṣṭaiva rājate, tathā ca yam iti yat pada-vācyo bhāva eva na tu sāmānyato nirguṇa-bhakti-yogaḥ \(Monika Horstmann, p. 236\). 
80.  kevalena hi bhāvena gopyo gāvo nagā mṛgāḥ ye ‘nye mūḍha-dhiyo nāgāḥ siddhā mām īyur añjasā \(Indeed, the cowherd women, cows, mountains, animals, other entities with stunted intelligence, and snakes all achieved perfection by love for Me and thus very easily achieved Me\). 
81.  tathaiva saṇdarbhaḥ yaṃ bhāvam atrāpi yogādayo bhagavat-parā eva, yogādibhir yatnavān apīty anena tat-prāpty arthaṃ prayujyamānatvāvagamanāt ity ādikaḥ \(Monika Horstmann, p. 237\). 
82.  atra bhagavad-arpita-karmāder bhāvaṃ prati yat kāraṇatvaṃ niṣiddhaṃ tat tu sākṣād eva, paraṃparayā tu dharmasyāpavārgyasyety ādau tat-samarpitam asti yathā prīti-saṇdarbhe, tad evaṃ śrīmat-prīter evāpavargatvam ity ādi \(Monika Horstmann, p. 237\). 
83.  evam agre ‘pi tatra tatra tad-vyākhyāyām atyanta-śaithilyam anusaṇdheyam, tasmāt sa vai puṃsām ity ādīnāṃ śrīdhara-svāmyādy ukta-vyākhyānam eva samyak, prakṛtam anusarāmaḥ \(Monika Horstmann, p. 238\). 
84.  tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer bhajann apakvo ‘tha patet tato yadi yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ ko vārtha āpto ‘bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ. 
85.  na buddhi-bhedaṃ janayed ajñānāṃ karma-sanginām, yojayet sarva-karmāṇi vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran. 
86.  iti śrī-gītopaniṣad-vākyena karma-tyājanaṃ niṣiddhaṃ satyaṃ taj-jñānopadeṣṭṛ-viṣayam eva jñānasyāntaḥ karaṇa-śuddhy-adhīnatvāt, tac-chuddhes tu niṣkāma-karmādhīnatvāt, bhaktes tu svataḥ prābalyād antaḥ karaṇa-śuddhi-paryantānapekṣatvāt, na bhukty-upadeṣṭṛ-viñayam. 
87.  ity ādi bhagavad-vākya-balān nitya-naimittika-sva-dharmaniṣṭhāyā api tyājanayaiva kevalaiva hari-bhaktir upadeṣṭavyety āśayenāha tyaktveti. 
88.  bhajanārambha-daśāyām api karmānuvṛttir niṣiddhā sva-dharmaṃ tyaktvā yo bhajan syād amuṣyābhadraṃ tāvan na bhaved eva. 
89.  ity āder yadi punar upakvo bhagavat-prāpty-ayogyo mriyeta jīvann eva vā kathaṃcid anyāsaktas tato bhajanāt durācāratayā vā patet, tad api karma-tyāga-nimittam abhadraṃ na bhaved eva bhakti-vāsanāyās tv anucchitti-dharmatvāt sūkṣma-rūpeṇa. 
90.  śrī-bhagavad-vākyād amogha-bhakty-ankurasyāvaśya-bhāvya-patra-puṣpa-phalāditvād iti bhāvaḥ. 
91.  abhajatāṃ abhajadbhis tu sva-dharmataḥ ko vā artha āpto na ko ‘pīty arthaḥ. 
92.  karmādināṃ sarvathā bhakty-aupayogitve tat tad-asangatatvāpatti tathāpi āgraha-vaśāt, pūrvokta-vacana-jāteṣu kaṣṭa-kalpatayānyārtha-kalpanaṃ tu āñjasyābhāvāt, bhāvārtha-dīpikā-vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī-hari-bhakti-vilāsa-bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-saṇdarbhādi-graṇtha-virodhāt, sarva-saṃpradāya-virodhāt, śaithilyāt pramāṇābhāvāc ca pāramārthikair nādaraṇīyam \(Monika Horstmann, p. 255\). 
93.  dvitīya-skandhasya prathamādhyāye idaṃ bhāgavataṃ nāmety asya vyākhyāyām, adhītavān ity asya śāstrārtho buddhi-balena svayaṃ jñātum aśakya iti ca tasmād vaiṣṇavair api śuddha-bhakti-prati-pādanāya varṇāśrama-vihitāni karmāṇi vaiṣṇava-śāstrokta-vidhinā kartavyānyeveti niṣkarṣaḥ, vaiṣṇava-śāstraṃ ca hari-bhakti-vilāsādi \(Monika Horstmann, p. 257\). 
94.  Gupta, *The Caitanya Vaiṣṇava Vedānta of Jīva Gosvāmī*, p. 83. 
95.  Burton, *Temples*,* Texts and Taxes*, p. 74. 
96.  vṛndāṭavīśvara-sabhā-jana-rājamāna-śrī-viśvanātha-guṇa-sūcaka-kāvya-ratnam mac-citta-samputam alaṇkurutām tad-īkṣā-saubhāgya-bījam api śīghram amūṃ vidhattām. 
97.  The *Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta* describes the activities between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, glorifying them. *Śrī-Viśvanātha* could also be read another way, possessing a dual meaning. Therefore, as well as meaning the “glorious Viśvanātha,” another meaning is “Śrī and the lord of the universe,” or Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. 
98.  Burton, *Temples*,* Texts and Taxes*, p. 114. 
99.  asmiṃl loke vartamānaḥ sva-dharma-stho ‘naghaḥ śuciḥ jñānam viśuddham āpnoti mad-bhaktiṃ vā yadṛcchayā. 
100.  yadṛcchā svairitety abhidhānāt kaṣṭa-kalpanayā vyākhyānantare bhakteḥ sva-prakāśatvaṃ na siddhed iti tad anādṛtam ity ato niṣkāmo ‘pi karma-yogo na bhakter hetur ity āha. 
101.  For more information on the term “*yadṛcchayā*” consult: Johnathan B. Edelmann, “The Cause of Devotion in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Theology,” *Journal of the American Oriental Society* 135\(1.49\) \(2015\), pp. 53–55. 
102.  brahma-vid āpnoti param satyam jñānam anantam brahma yo veda-nihitam guhāyām so ‘śnute sarvān kāmān saha brahmaṇā vipaścitā. 
103.  …tam eva viditvāti mṛtyum eti nānyaḥ panthā vidyate ‘yanāya. 
104.  kevalaṃ jñānam apy anarthakaṃ tarhi? na, avidyā-nivartakatve sati dṛṣṭa-kaivalya-phalāvasānatvāt | avidyā-tamo-nivartakasya jñānasya dṛṣṭaṃ kaivalya-phalāvasānatvam | rajjv-ādi-viṣaye sarpādy-ajñāna-tamo-nivartaka-pradīpa-prakāśa-phalavat | vinivṛtta-sarpādi-vikalpa-rajju-kaivalyāvasānaṃ hi prakāśa-phalam | tathā jñānam | 
105.  For more on this topic consult: Swami Gambhirananda, Mandukya Karika 2.32, *Eight Upaniṣads* \(Calcutta, 1990\), p.251–256. and A. J. Alston, *Shankara on the Absolute* \(London, 1980\), p. 115. 
106.  yeṣām tv anta-gatam pāpam janānām puṇya-karmaṇām te dvandva-moha-nirmuktā bhajante mām dṛdha-vratāḥ. 
107.  tarhi keṣām bhaktāv adhikāra ity ata āha yeṣām puṇya-karmaṇām pāpam tv antam gatam anta-kālam prāntam naśyad-avastham na tu samyak naṣṭam ity arthaḥ, teṣām sattva-guṇodreke sati tamo-guṇa-hrāsaḥ, tasmin sati tat-kāryo moho ‘pi hrasati, moha-hrāse sati te khalu atyāsakti-rahitā yādṛcchika-bhakta-saṅgena bhajante mātram, ye tu bhajanādy-abhyāsataḥ samyak naṣṭa-pāpās te mohena niḥśeṣeṇa muktā dṛdha-vratāḥ prāpta-niṣṭhāḥ santo mām bhajante, na caivam puṇya-karmaiva sarva-vidhāyā bhakteḥ kāraṇam iti mantavyam.  
\(BP 11.12.9\) yam na yogena sāṇkhyena dāna-vrata-tapo ‘dhvaraiḥ vyākhyā-svādhyāya-sannyāsaiḥ prāpnuyād yatnavān api. iti bhagavad-ukteḥ, kevala-bhakti-yogasya punyādi-karmāśrayam naiva kāraṇam iti bahuśaḥ pratipādanāt.  
108.  Edelmann, “The Cause of Devotion,” p. 61. 
109.  bhakti-mātra kāmanayārpita-karmādeḥ sat-kṛpā-mūlakatvāc ca, sat-kṛpāyāś ca sva-tantratvaṃ sva-rūpa-śakti-vilāsatvaṃ ca taiḥ svīkṛtam eveti \(Monika Horstmann, p. 234\). 
110.  vyāmiśreṇeva vākyena buddhiṁ mohayasīva me tad ekaṁ vada niścitya yena śreyo ‘ham āpnuyām. 
111.  bho vayasya arjuna satyaṃ guṇātītā bhaktiḥ sarvotkṛṣṭaiva, kintu sā yādṛcchika-mad-aikāntaika-mahā-bhakta-kṛpaika-labhyatvāt purusodyama-sādhyā na bhavati. ata eva nistraiguṇyo bhava guṇātītayā mad-bhaktyā tvaṃ nistraiguṇyo bhūyā ity āśīrvāda eva dattaḥ, sa ca yadā phaliṣyati tadā tādṛśa-yādṛcchikaikāntika-bhakta-kṛpayā prāptām api lapsyase, sāmprataṃ tu karmaṇy evādhikāras te iti. 
112.  In this verse BG 3.2, Viśvanātha’s comments imply that Arjuna is recommended to practice *karma* for now as he is not qualified to practise *bhakti*. This contrasts Viśvanātha’s earlier comments that *bhakti* can be practised from the very beginning. However, later in the chapter in respect to BG 3.26, Viśvanātha explains that the stipulation to not disturb those who are attached to action is in regard to the practice of *jñāna*. However, in respect to *bhakti* which is independent and strong, and is not dependent on the purity of heart, if it is possible for you to produce faith in *bhakti* then you may even disrupt those attached to *karma*. For those who have faith in *bhakti*, they have no necessity to perform *karma*. \(bhaktes tu svataḥ prābalyād antaḥkaraṇa-śuddhi-paryantānapekṣatvāt | yadi bhaktau śraddhām utpādayituṃ śaknuyāt, tadā karmiṇāṃ buddhi-bhedam api janayet, bhaktau śraddhāvatāṃ karmānadhikārāt\) He also quotes four verses to verify his position – BP 11.20.9, BP 11.11.32, BG 18.66, BP 1.5.17. Viśvanātha’s perspective on BG 3.26 resembles his position displayed in BP 1.2.6, BP 1.2.8 and BP 1.5.17 outlined earlier. 
113.  \(BP\(BP 11.2.46\) prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ iti madhyama-bhakta-vaiṣamyasya vidyamānatvād bhagavataś ca sva-bhakta-vaśyatvena tat-kṛpānugāmi-kṛpatve na kiñcid asāmañjasyam, yato bhakta-kṛpāyā hetur bhaktasyaiva tasya hṛdaya-vartinī bhaktir eva, tāṃ vinā kṛpodaya-sambhavābhāvād iti bhakteḥ sva-prakāśatvam eva siddhām \(*Mādhurya Kādambinī, prathamā vṛṣṭiḥ* \[first shower\], verse 6\). 
114.  Described in BP 11.2.45–47. 


