+++
title = "4 Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya"
+++

Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, determining the jurisdiction of karma  

DOI: 10.4324/9781003018742-4

## Introduction

Jaisingh II’s reign was marked by religious reforms, reflected in the religious court debates he hosted. The employment of *brahmins* and the production of specialised works, all contributed to his vision of statecraft and kingship. Jaisingh II was an extremely active and effective political ruler, who not only created his very own city but also influenced the major discourses of his time. He was also an author and composer of several texts, including a commentary on the *Brahma-sūtras*, known by several names: the *Tattvārtha-dīpikā*, the *Brahma-sūtra-vivṛti* and the *Brahma-bodhinī*. The focus of the preceding chapter, the *Karma-vivṛti* of Kṛṣṇadeva, surfaced in this period. Jaisingh II’s pivotal role in the production of this text is self-evident, as evidenced by Kṛṣṇadeva’s dedication of the composition to the King in the introduction to the text. This exposition is testament to the mounting re-examination of the role of *bhakti* in light of the orthodox reforms initiated by the King, revolving around his interest in *karma*. Thus, Kṛṣṇadeva’s* Karma-vivṛti*, a presentation exemplifying the orthodox stance of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school, was not the only contribution from the sect in this period. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* was also compiled to expand on the subject of *karma-bhakti* relations. Although the authorship of the text is ambiguous, 1  it is listed as having been caused by Jaisingh II, the King himself, indicative of its significant role in this period. 2  

In our examination of the *Karma-vivṛti*, I explored the compatibility of both *karma* and *bhakti* and the function of *karma* in consideration of the independent position of *bhakti*. I also investigated how Kṛṣṇadeva and Viśvanātha agree to varying degrees that *karma* offers a valuable function on the path of *bhakti*. I also examined Kṛṣṇadeva’s stance on this topic in contrast to Viśvanātha’s view and highlighted the distinctions. Despite the differences, Kṛṣṇadeva and Viśvanātha are however in complete agreement as to the ultimate role of *karma* in relation to *bhakti*. For the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, *karma* will never be the goal; at most it can only serve as a stepping-stone or gateway to *bhakti*. 3  This raises several critical questions. Considering that *karma* and *bhakti* are compatible, what is the ultimate obligation, if any, to adhering to rules pertaining to *karma* and *varṇāśrama* practices for a *bhakti* practitioner? At what point can or should *karma* be abandoned? If the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava position on *karma* had an expiration point, then it would imply that there is no consciously developed public theology or public responsibility other than adopting *karma* until one is eligible to abandon it. Therefore, it appears that complete devotion or *bhakti* to Kṛṣṇa would be antithetical to engagement in worldly and public life. Exploring such questions will help us understand the extent to which public engagement was considered necessary for members of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community. In this chapter, I will examine these themes and questions primarily through the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, which is an exposition on determining the jurisdiction of *karma*. The text is predominantly a composition of references from principle Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava works. Considering that identical references appear in the *Karma-vivṛti*, I will also draw on this text intermittently, offering further relevant insights into key issues raised. I will also examine the critical theme of *śraddhā* or faith and analyse its pivotal role in determining the jurisdiction of *karma* for a *bhakti* practitioner. In light of the transcendent status of *bhakti* in relation to worldly affairs, I will also examine notions like *lokasaṅgraha* or the uptake of public responsibility for the welfare of the general public. I will also explore the behavioural and moral norms delineated by saints and scriptures. In consideration of these factors, I will illustrate the impact they had on the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community’s engagement in the public sphere in this period.

In this chapter, I will begin by tracing the main themes that populate the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, the title – “determining the jurisdiction of *karma*” – reflects the overarching theme that the text strives to build upon. The first part of the text presents three significant perspectives on this subject. The views of Śrīdhara Svāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī \(through the interpretive lens of Jīva Gosvāmī\) and Sanātana Gosvāmī are offered. The early portion of the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* strives to illustrate that these respected Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava authors concur in their view that “firm faith” or “mature faith” in *bhakti* empowers one to transcend the authority of the modes of conduct determined by scriptural injunctions pertaining to *karma* whereas one possessing “weak faith” in *bhakti* remains under the jurisdiction of *karma*. The text then proceeds to establish how even though one may have attained mature faith and thus is theoretically beyond the jurisdiction of *karma*, they nevertheless still maintain an obligation to conform to moral and behavioural norms set out by age-old saints. This applies especially to one who is a socially engrossed active member of the public community. Subsequently, such a person’s responsibility to abide by the injunctions relating to *varṇāśrama* extends; now one must adhere to the injunctions in an ideal fashion for the sake of other constituents within their social environment, inspired by the notion of *lokasaṅgraha*. The text also outlines guidelines to reassure *bhakti* practitioners that despite the mandate to partake in worldly conduct defined by *karma* and *varṇāśrama*, they nevertheless can maintain their progress in *bhakti* without impediment. The text aspires to illustrate that *bhakti* and *karma* practices can coexist under specific conditions, without conflicting with the purity of *bhakti* practice as one advances. Hence, there is an overwhelming effort in the text to promote the status of *karma*, symptomatic of the concerns over suitable public engagement stemming from the political pressures in this period. 

## Is the adoption of **karma** and **varṇāśrama** indispensable for a **bhakti** practitioner?

Having examined the compatibility of *karma* and *bhakti* and outlined how the practice of *karma* can lead to *bhakti* in the* Karma-vivṛti*, I will analyse *karma–bhakti* relations further and investigate whether a *bhakti* practitioner has an indispensable obligation to follow the rules pertaining to *karma*, as it relates to the *varṇāśrama* system. In other words, is the practice of *karma* with all its social responsibilities determined by one’s *varṇa* and *aśrama* inescapable for one striving on the path of *bhakti*?

The following two verses feature in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and appear to indicate that there is no fundamental obligation. The verses are derived from the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, wherein Rūpa states \(BRS 1.2.63–64\):
>  
> One qualified for *bhakti* is at fault for not executing the limbs of *bhakti*. However, they are not at fault for not performing their *karma*. Due to destiny, they may \(even\) engage in some forbidden activity, \(however\) there is no atonement required for them. This is the opinion of those who know the mystery of Vaiṣṇava scriptures. 4  

These two verses emphatically stipulate that a *bhakti* practitioner has no obligations in terms of prescribed *karma*, although obligations exist for the practice of *bhakti*. Furthermore, even if they commit some violation, no separate atonement is necessary; *bhakti* itself is sufficient to purify one. These statements relegate the significance of practices like *karma*. To substantiate his proclamation further, Rūpa refers to passages from the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* and the *Bhagavad-gītā*, such as BP 1.5.17, BP 11.11.32, BP 11.5.41 and BG 18.66. These passages all propagate the notion that one who has neglected prescribed *karmas* defined by *varṇāśrama-dharma* but who has nevertheless taken complete refuge of Kṛṣna on the path of *bhakti* need have no fear of incurring sin. This series of verses from Rūpa presents compelling evidence to suggest that engagement in *karma* is not required for one who has begun the practice of *bhakti*. Inevitably, this would be a cause of concern for a ruler such as Jaisingh II who was seeking endorsement for orthodox forms of public engagement such as *karma* from sects within his domains.

It is worth highlighting that BRS 1.2.63–64 appears in the concluding section of the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* which delineates the eligibility for *sādhana-bhakti* and the moral responsibilities of a person who has attained this state. These verses highlight that one must in all circumstances not fail to practice *bhakti*; however, if they fail to adhere to the injunctions ordained by *varṇāśrama*, this on the other hand is permissible. It is also stressed in this section that if they inadvertently are compelled to violate ethical principles, *bhakti* is sufficient in and of itself to rectify the encroachment. Following BRS 1.2.63–64, verses 65–71 are referenced to further display the potency of *bhakti* in enabling atonement and stressing that no separate endeavour is required. These statements illustrate *bhakti*’s self-sufficient nature and consequently a practitioner is not required to adopt any other purificatory process as *bhakti* is the most effective cleansing method. These verses highlight that *bhakti* is the greatest purifier; therefore, even if a practitioner engages in forbidden acts, they need not do anything other than partake in *bhakti* for reformation. The verses also illustrate *bhakti*’s superior status over other paths, stressing that for one who is eligible for pure *bhakti*, adopting or maintaining the performance of the practices of *karma* and *jñāna* and neglecting to execute *bhakti* are misinformed. Therefore, engaging in *bhakti* absolves one from the necessity to abide by the rules, practices and prohibitions pertaining to *varṇāśrama*.

*Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.63–64, along with other such passages which will be explored further in this chapter, presented a challenge for governing bodies concerned with public engagement. This apparent disregard for social conventions proved problematic for the smooth running of Jaisingh II’s governance, and subsequently he inspired the production of works such as the *Karma-vivṛti* and the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* in response to this mounting issue. Jaisingh II was therefore the catalyst for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition’s sudden preoccupation with the theme of *karma* and its integration with *bhakti* practices. This sudden interest in *karma* indicates a definite shift in theological concerns taking place at this time, accentuated if not directly invoked by a religious King concerned with public matters. I will examine how such specialised works as the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* assisted the King in his reformation efforts. In the opening remarks to this work, its purpose is delineated as a systematic inquiry into whether *varṇāśrama* is prescribed for the *bhaktas* of the Lord. 5  The text itself is primarily a selection of teachings from the prominent teachers of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, particularly Śrīdhara’s commentary on the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, the *Bhāvārtha-dīpikā*, but also venerated authors such as Jīva, Rūpa and Sanatāna, who were the foremost teachers of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect after Caitanya’s departure. 6  Focusing primarily on the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, I will illustrate relations between *karma* and *bhakti* further and convey the importance of* karma* practice. 

## Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava authorities reveal that **karma** and **varṇāśrama** are necessary for a **bhakti** practitioner of “weak faith”

### Śrīdhara Svāmī

The first perspective is derived from Śrīdhara’s comments on a series of passages from the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, highlighting the limits of *karma*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* shares a pivotal verse on *karma* which features frequently in this work and also appears in numerous instances in the *Karma-vivṛti*, 7  and is regarded as fundamental to defining the jurisdiction of *karma*. Kṛṣṇa states to Uddhava in BP 11.20.9, “One should perform *karma* as long as one is not disgusted or until faith in hearing my narrations and so on arises.” 8  This verse describes that faith in *bhakti* and exhaustion in material pursuits demarcated by *karma* qualify one to relinquish prescribed *karmas*. Elaborating on the meaning of this passage, *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* refers to Śrīdhara’s comments on this verse to highlight that the faith referenced in this verse is of a specific type, namely “firm” faith. 9  Śrīdhara verifies this interpretation by firstly referring to a later verse BP 11.20.28 wherein the expression “firm conviction” is utilised. 10  He explains that one who has such firm faith or conviction as illustrated in these verses possesses a confidence that everything will happen automatically by virtue of his practice of *bhakti*. 11  The implication is that in attaining this state, with an unshakable dependence on and conviction in *bhakti*, prescribed *karmas* can be discarded. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* then delineates a series of comments from Śrīdhara on particular verses from the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* and the *Bhagavad-gītā* that reaffirm this viewpoint, for instance, his comments on BP 11.11.32, 12  BG 18.66 13  and BP 1.5.17. 14  In this way, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, by employing the writings of Śrīdhara, establishes that the command of *karma* ends only when one attains firm faith. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* then presents an interesting proposition; the text extrapolates that Śrīdhara’s usage of phrases such as “by the firmness of *bhakti*” and “relishing *bhakti*” indicates firm faith \(*dṛḍha-śraddhā*\), which is synonymous with the term “mature faith” \(*prauḍha-śraddhā*\). 15  This proposal is significant as we will discover in various contexts varying expressions are utilised to denote “firm” or “mature” faith; however, according to the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* these terms are simply synonyms.

*Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* then delineates Śrīdhara’s comments on the preceding verse of this section of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, BP 11.20.8, which describes in detail the jurisdiction of *karma* according to one’s faith in *bhakti* further. Śrīdhara states:
>  
> \(BP 11.20.8 commentary\) In the later chapter it will be described that one engaged in *kāmya-karma* \(acts for fulfilling one’s own desires\) is under the full authority of \[scriptural\] prohibitions and injunctions. However, those qualified for *niṣkāma-karma-yoga* \(dutiful execution of one’s duty without attachment for the result\) only follow injunctions and prohibitions according to their ability and the authority of injunctions and prohibitions extends only until one is qualified for *jñāna-yoga* or *bhakti-yoga* and for those this authority is very weak. However, for those who have achieved perfection by these \[*jñāna* or *bhakti*\] then the obligation is nothing at all \[and are not under the domain of injunctions and prohibitions at all\]. 16  

This important reference from the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* outlines systematically at what stage prescribed *karmas* can be abandoned, thus detailing the extent of the jurisdiction of scriptural injunctions pertaining to *karma*. *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* also adds that the prohibitions and injunctions that are mentioned in Śrīdhara’s passage belong exclusively to the *karma-kāṇda* and not the *jñāna-* and *bhakti*-*kāṇda*, 17  thus clarifying for the reader that this commentarial passage from Śrīdhara is in relation to *karma* practice.

Combining together Śrīdhara’s comments to BP 11.20.8 and BP 11.20.9 as presented in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, one can infer that those who have achieved perfection by *jñāna* or *bhakti* possess firm faith, which enables them to relinquish injunctions pertaining to *karma*, and subsequently by not adhering to the rules and prohibitions of *karma*, no fault is attained. Once again, we observe that the key factor to determining the jurisdiction of *karma* is the level of faith one has achieved. Therefore, the extent to which one’s faith is weak, to that degree one is obliged to execute the rules and regulations pertaining to *karma*. Consequently, when one’s faith becomes firm, that obligation no longer remains. Considering faith’s pivotal role, weak faith can also be understood to be the cause for one being bound by the jurisdiction of *karma*, and in contrast firm faith is the cause of independence from the authority of *karma*. Kṛṣṇadeva also examines the same passage from Śrīdhara in the *Karma-vivṛti*. Both the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and the *Karma-vivṛti* offer clarifications on these passages through their respective commentaries. In the *Karma-vivṛti*, Kṛṣṇadeva further states that this passage from Śrīdhara regarding the authority of injunctions and prohibitions pertaining to *karma* relates to only *nitya* and *naimittika*-*karmas*, which must be offered to satisfy the supreme, and therefore even if one is obliged to execute acts of *karma*, one is still required to avoid *kāmya-karma* acts, 18  which are more selfish in orientation. I have summarised the points explored in Table 4.1. After elaborating on this passage from Śrīdhara on BP 11.20.8–9, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* proceeds to reinforce Śrīdhara’s perspective by employing similar supportive statements from the principal teachers of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect, namely Jīva, Rūpa and Sanatāna. 19  
*Table 4.1* Śrīdhara Svāmī on karma-bhakti relations   Nature of action  Faith in ***bhakti***  Material detachment  Authority of scriptural injunctions \(***karma***\)       
*Kāmya-karma* 

Weak 

Weak 

Strong 

*Niṣkāma-karma* 





Determined by level of

*niṣkāma* 

Qualified to practice *jñāna* or *bhakti*.

\[Otherwise only executes *nitya* and *naimittika karmas*\]





Weak 

Perfected by *jñāna* or *bhakti* 

Strong 

Strong 

None \(Proof: BG 18.66,

BP 11.18.28\) 

Before sharing the views of these influential teachers on *karma–bhakti* relations, it is worth offering a synopsis of the standing of Śrīdhara Svāmī in relation to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect. This insight will clarify why the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* deemed it essential to refer to his writings from the very beginning. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and the *Karma-vivṛti* frequently stress the significance of Śrīdhara’s teachings, regularly authenticating their principal ideas with his teachings. This is a trend also observed in other Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava works. Although a renunciate of a Śankarite order, Śrīdhara is revered in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition as the original commentator of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, upon which other teachers constructed and formed their teachings; consequently, Śrīdhara is held in high esteem within the tradition. His *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* commentary is the foundational treatise for the foremost teachers of the tradition, and his interpretations effectively became the foundation for the tradition’s understanding of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*. In the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, Kṛṣṇadasa Kavirāja narrates an encounter between Caitanya and a Vaiṣṇava named Vallabha Bhaṭṭa, the founder of the Puṣṭi* mārga*, which reveals Caitanya’s deep appreciation and reverence for Śrīdhara’s commentary, the *bhāvārtha-dīpika*. In *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 3.7.97–99, the Vaiṣṇava Vallabha Bhaṭṭa claims to have refuted the explanations of Śrīdhara as his explanations were inconsistent. Caitanya, troubled by Vallabha’s attitude, remarked that he likened anyone who did not accept the authority of Śrīdhara Svāmī to a prostitute. 20  This comparison is used by Caitanya to stress the significance of respect and chastity for the former teachers of the tradition; just as conventionally a woman was meant to only be devoted to one man, her husband, similarly a *bhakta* was expected to display fidelity to earlier teachers. The double meaning of the term “Svāmī,” which can translate to master or husband, is cleverly utilised here, as Caitanya exploits the dual meaning of the expression. According to Kṛṣṇadasa Kavirāja, Caitanya herein establishes the undisputed position of Śrīdhara for the followers of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism as a renowned teacher. Śrīdhara’s Advaitin affiliation was not a problem for Caitanya, who was himself initiated into a Śankarite order of renunciates. Jīva also states in the *Tattva-sandarbha \(27\)* that Śrīdhara was a pure Vaiṣṇava who adopted the guise of an Advaitin only to benefit the members of this school of thought. In other words, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition’s view is that Śrīdhara presented ideas broadly enough in order to entice followers of the Advaitin tradition, although in reality he was a stalwart Vaiṣṇava. 21  Therefore, considering the exalted position of Śrīdhara within the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* invokes the venerated teachings of Śrīdhara in the first instance, and then proceeds to explain that this stance is also similarly espoused by the principal Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava teachers.

### Jīva Gosvāmī

The second viewpoint I will articulate from the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* is derived from Rūpa’s *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* and specifically Jīva’s views on Rūpa’s statements.

The BRS 1.2.16–19 states as follows:
>  
> \(16\) There are three types of persons qualified for *bhakti*: the highest, the intermediate and the lowest. \(17\) In this respect, the highest is expert in logic and scripture and has firm conviction in all circumstances. That person has mature faith and is considered to be the highest in *bhakti*. \(18\) The intermediate *bhakta* is not expert in scriptures but does however possess faith. \(19\) The third and lowest level is characterized by weak faith and is known as the *kaniṣṭha*. 22   

On this passage, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* offers an extensive commentary primarily referring to Jīva’s comments. Of particular interest is the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*’s focus on the nature of faith possessed by the *madhyama* or the intermediate *bhakta*. In the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, Rūpa states that the intermediate *bhakta*’s faith is described as *śraddhāvān* or one who possesses faith; however, he does not elaborate on the nature of the faith possessed. *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* states that according to Jīva, mature faith, or *prauḍha-śraddhā*, appears in both the intermediate and the highly advanced *bhaktas*. 23  The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* substantiates this claim by referring to Jīva’s comments on BRS 1.2.17, which declares that the *uttama* or highest *bhakta* possesses *prauḍha-śraddhā*, or mature faith. 24  In the subsequent verse BRS 1.2.18, the intermediate *bhakta* is described as *śraddhāvān*; Jīva depicts the nature of this faith to denote one who is firmly convinced or *dṛḍha-niścayaḥ*. 25  Earlier I mentioned that *dṛḍha-niścayaḥ* \(firm conviction\) and *prauḍha-śraddha* \(mature faith\) are synonymous according to the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*. Therefore, *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* utilises Jīva’s comments on this passage to reveal that the *uttama* or highest *bhakta* and the *madhyama* or intermediate *bhakta* both possess a faith that is mature \(*prauḍha-śraddha\)*, even though these two individuals are distinguished into separate categories by Rūpa. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* does not regard the distinction between the *uttama* and the *madhyama bhakta* to be determined by faith; rather, it suggests that the hierarchy or difference arises according to the ability to reconcile the contradictory conclusions of the scriptures. 26  In other words the highest \(*uttama*\) *bhakta* is able to refute all arguments and challenges and reconcile philosophical contradictions, whereas the intermediate \(*madyama*\) *bhakta* may or may not be able to respond adequately when met with such philosophical confrontations; however, in regard to the degree of faith in *bhakti* they are equals. Therefore, the intermediate *bhakta* is not bound by the jurisdiction of *karma* in the same way as the highest *bhakta* due to firm or mature faith, and it is only the *kaniṣṭha* or lowest* bhakta* that remains under the jurisdiction of *karma*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* claims that as long as one’s faith is weak or as long as one remains in the category of a *kaniṣṭha*, there will be some obligation to *karma*. 27  Therefore, of the different *bhaktas* described by Rūpa, it is only the lowest or *kaniṣṭha bhakta* that is obliged to follow injunctions pertaining to *karma*. These passages and perspectives are outlined in Table 4.2. 
*Table 4.2* Jīva Gosvāmī on karma–bhakti relations   Category of ***bhakta***  Faith in ***bhakti***  Authority of scriptural injunctions \(***karma***\)  Expertise in logic and ***sastra***       
*Kaniṣṭha* \(lowest\) 

Weak \(*komala*\) 

Strong 

Weak 

*Madhyama* \(intermediate\) 

Firm conviction

\(*dṛḍha-niścayaḥ*\) 

None 

Medium 

*Uttama* \(highest\) 

Mature faith

\(*prauḍha*\) 

None 

Strong 

By employing Jīva’s interpretation of Rūpa’s widely known distinctions of *bhaktas*, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* is able to postulate that it is only the *madhyama* and *uttama* that are eligible to abandon rules pertaining to *varṇāśrama* or *karma*. This complements Śrīdhara’s position on this subject. It is evident from both perspectives that there is a responsibility to follow injunctions pertaining to *karma* if one’s faith in *bhakti* is weak or not firm, symptomised by his attraction to material temptations, and the lack of scriptural understanding. This presents somewhat of a contradiction considering that earlier in this chapter I shared passage BRS 1.2.63–64 28  as found in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, which implies that a *bhakta* once embarking on the path of *bhakti* is free from the jurisdiction of *karma* and therefore does not incur sin in neglecting the performance of *karma*. BRS 1.2.63–64 appears to conflict with the claim that a novice on the path of *bhakti* or one who possesses weak faith in *bhakti* is still governed by injunctions pertaining to the practice of *karma*. If this passage in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* is accepted literally it contradicts the aforementioned hierarchies and stands in opposition to the interpretation proposed in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*. Furthermore, in BRS 1.2.63–64 it is evident that the grammatical plural form \(not the single or dual cases\) for the expression “for persons qualified for *bhakti*”* \(bhakti*-*adhikāriṇām\)* is employed. Therefore, this implies that this refers to not only the *uttama*-*adhikārīs* and *madhyama*-*adhikārīs*, but also the *kaniṣṭha*-*adhikārīs*, and if not understood in this way then the usage of the plural case is illogical. Therefore, this exemption from *karma* also applies for the *kaniṣṭha*; otherwise the dual form would have been alternatively used. However, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* in response cleverly utilises Jīva’s commentary on BRS 1.2.16–19 to argue that it is only the *uttama* and *madhyama* who are eligible to be exempt from *karma*’s authority. Therefore, when the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* refers to the series of verses found in BRS 1.2.63–71 which describe that a *bhakta* is not at fault if he abandons *karma* or *dharma*, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* maintains its stance, and stipulates that BRS 1.2.63–71 characterises one who has mature faith. 29  However, the problem remains as to why the plural form is used “for persons qualified for *bhakti*” rather than the expected dual form in this case. To address this anomaly, Kṛṣṇadeva in the *Karma-vivṛti* claims that in BRS 1.2.63 the expression “persons qualified for *bhakti*” is in the plural form to demonstrate the great glory of those with firm faith, or in order to show them respect 30  and not to propose that all *adhikārīs* are exempt from the jurisdiction of *karma*. In this way, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* stresses that exemption from codes of conduct in relation to *varṇāśrama* only applies to those that have attained mature faith, such as the *madhyamas* and *uttamas*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* undertakes great efforts to ensure that this portion of the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* is not misunderstood to encourage the intentional abandonment of one’s responsibilities pertaining to *varṇāśrama* prematurely; such efforts supported the King’s ambition to instil orthodox forms of conduct and behaviour within his domain. 

### Sanatāna Gosvāmī

The final perspective on this subject is derived from a passage from Sanatāna’s *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*  31  to further substantiate the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*’s proposition that one with weak faith in *bhakti* is governed by the authority of *karma*. Sanatāna states the following in his *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* \(11.10–11\):
>  
> Having elaborated on *karma* since a *bhakta* with weak faith \(*mṛdu-śraddhā*  32 \), who is not fully mature, is still governed by some *karma*. \[Whereas\] there is never a fall down for a *bhakta* with mature faith, for such a *bhakta* is not under the domain of *karma*. This will be written/described later on. 33  

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* states that this statement appears in a section of *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* concerning the elimination of the jurisdiction of *karma*; it then refers to a series of passages within *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* beginning with BP 11.20.9, 34  which illustrates for whom *karma* practices are irrelevant. This section of *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, derived from the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, first outlines who is under the jurisdiction of *karma* and subsequently outlines who is not, and offers proof of the removal of the obligation by referring to various works. Thus, this passage in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* \(11.10–11\) reinforces the notion that a *bhakti* practitioner with weak faith is required to follow the injunctions pertaining to *varṇāśrama* and declares only those with mature or firm faith are exempt from the jurisdiction of *karma*. This account advocates a similar stance to that witnessed in the explanations of Śrīdhara and Jīva in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* explored earlier. This *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* passage also features in Kṛṣṇadeva’s *Karma-vivṛti*, in which he remarks that such a person with weak faith who fails to execute *nitya* and *naimittika karma* incurs *karmic* reactions when acting in this world, whereas a *bhakta* with mature faith leaves no *karmic* footprint when operating in this world. He refers to BG 18.66 35  and BP 11.18.28 as further proof of this. 36  The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* refers to Sanatāna’s *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* to reinforce the belief that until one achieves mature faith in *bhakti*, one is obliged to follow rules and regulations pertaining to the *varṇāśrama* social system, as depicted in Table 4.3.
*Table 4.3* Sanatāna Gosvāmī on karma–bhakti relations   Faith in ***bhakti***  Authority of scriptural injunctions \(***karma***\)       
Weak \(*mṛdu*\) 

Strong 

Mature faith \(*prauḍha*\) 

None \(BG 18.66 and BP 11.18.28\) 

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* draws on Sanatāna, Rūpa and Jīva to illustrate consistency with the teachings of Śrīdhara on this contentious topic. At times the *Karma-vivṛti* also refers to identical passages and provides insightful clarifications, indicative that these two texts were likely to have been composed in conjunction. Furthermore, considering Kṛṣṇadeva’s employment as the theological advisor to the King, it is likely that they had numerous discourses on this topic which once documented were referenced regularly during the debates in the Jaipur courts. Regardless of the precise nature of the authorship, through the arguments offered in these works they were able to argue authoritatively of the relevance of orthodox practices epitomised by *karma* grounded upon Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theology.

In the course of this analysis of the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* I was able to formulate three perspectives illustrating how *karma–bhakti* relations are defined by the level of one’s faith in *bhakti*. The first perspective was based on comments by Śrīdhara on BP 11.20.8–9, the second explanation was derived from Jīva’s comments on Rūpa’s *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.16–19 and the final explanation is extrapolated from a reference from Sanatāna’s* Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* 11.10–11. By utilising these authoritative readings, as well as demarcating the jurisdiction of *karma*, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* also endeavours to counter contentious interpretations of passages such as *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.2.63–71. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* presents numerous clarifications throughout the work that aspire to thwart misinterpretations leading to the deliberate or premature neglect of one’s obligations pertaining to *varṇāśrama*. The composition argues vehemently that immunity from prescribed *karma* practices only relate to those that have attained mature faith in *bhakti*. Thus, it is abundantly clear from this exposition that until one attains firm conviction or mature faith in *bhakti* one is obliged to follow the injunctions pertaining to *karma*. In a community consisting of members with varying degrees of faith, this would have been a critical benchmark to determining the extent of one’s social obligations, thus becoming a vital tool for organising social positions and responsibility. In the course of this analysis, *śraddhā* or faith emerges as a pivotal factor determining the expected level of one’s public responsibility, and specifically mature or firm faith is identified as the prerequisite that enables one to forsake *karma*. Considering the fundamental role of *śraddhā* or faith in *bhakti*, I will explore the subject further in the following section. In the preceding chapter, it was also noted that Viśvanātha declared that it is only the grace from the *bhaktas* that enables one to receive such *śraddhā*; therefore, in the next section, I will also examine in more detail the relationship between *śraddhā* and such grace.

## The role of **Śraddhā** or faith

*Śraddhā* is commonly depicted to convey faith or conviction. In the Oxford English dictionary, “faith” is defined as complete trust or confidence in someone or something. In the framework of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava literatures, what is that someone or something? In other words, what is the object of *śraddhā* or where does *śraddhā* repose itself? To begin answering this question I will refer to a crucial verse that appears in numerous instances in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and the *Karma-vivṛti*. In the eleventh book of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, Kṛṣṇa instructs Uddhava that “one should perform action \(*karma*\) until faith in the hearing of my narrations, and so on arises”; 37  this verse defines the jurisdiction of *karma*. Faith, in this context, is denoted in relation to a particular activity, specifically hearing narrations about Kṛṣṇa and comparable activities. We see a similar pattern in other verses of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* and the *Gītā*, where the object of faith is a sacrifice or hearing of Kṛṣṇa or praising Kṛṣṇa and so on. It is often described that each of these activities should be executed with *śraddhā*; hence the term frequently appears in the instrumental case. 38  Rembert Lutjeharms in his article “*Śraddhā* in Caitanya Vaiṣṇava Thought” comprehensively analyses *śraddhā* within the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, explaining:
>  
> *Śraddhā* in different times and contexts has had and will carry different meanings, however in Caitanya Vaiṣṇava thought it generally refers to – as Jan Gonda puts it – “the performer’s active, positive and affirmative attitude towards religious acts, his belief in the transcendental effects of the ritual performance and the effectiveness of the rites.” Though *śraddhā* often implies an acceptance of certain theological views, nevertheless within Caitanya Vaiṣṇava writings it is primarily ascetical or ritual in character and more concerned with practice than doctrine. 39  

In other words, we notice within Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava writings the object or target of *śraddhā* is primarily a precise action or mode of living, and secondarily doctrines. The primary role of *śraddhā* is similarly echoed in the core texts of the tradition and the writings of the foremost theologians of the tradition. Now that the object of *śraddhā* has been identified, I will explore the multiple levels of *śraddhā* in relation to such activities as presented in Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava writings.

Earlier in this chapter I established that there are different levels or degrees of *śraddhā*. Two types of faith in particular were outlined, *komala-śraddhā* or weak faith \(or *mṛḍu-śraddhā*\) and *dṛḍha-śraddhā* or firm faith, also known as *prauḍha-śraddhā* or mature faith. Faith depicted as *komala-śraddhā* is the faith possessed by a *kaniṣṭha bhakta*, in other words the faith of a novice on the *bhakti* path. This is described in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 2.23.5, it is stated that “if by some fortune some *jīvas* have faith then those *jīvas* associate with holy men.” 40  In the same way Rūpa describes in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.4.15–16 that “one begins with initial faith, which then leads to the association of saints.” 41  In contrast, firm or mature faith is the mode of faith acquired by the *madhyama* and *uttama bhaktas*, which qualifies them to transcend the jurisdiction of *karma*. The mental disposition of one who possesses mature faith contrasts that of one possessing weak faith, marked by the resolute conviction that a specific practice will lead to perfection. This is outlined succinctly in the well-accepted definition of *śraddhā* proposed in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 2.22.37, which describes that “the term *śraddhā* or faith denotes a very profound belief that if one performs Kṛṣṇa*-bhakti* all *karma* is \[automatically\] performed.” 42  This also resembles the definition offered by Śrīdhara which appears in numerous places in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*. Śrīdhara explains that one who has firm faith has the “firm conviction that by *bhakti* alone all will be accomplished.” 43  Śrīdhara offers this explanation in his comments to BP 11.20.9, BP 11.11.32 and BG 18.66. This enables us to understand the precise nature of the faith that qualifies one to abandon *karma*, as opposed to a generic faith or the initial faith described earlier. Considering Śrīdhara’s repeated usage of this phrase and the fact that it appears later in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, one can infer that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition’s definition of firm or mature faith is derived from Śrīdhara’s interpretation on this subject.

Considering *śraddhā*’s definitive role in demarcating the jurisdiction of *karma* for a *bhakti* practitioner, it is important to examine how *śraddhā* in *bhakti* arises to begin with. We will observe connections between this discussion and the section in the previous chapter that examined the causeless nature of *bhakti*, where it was concluded that *bhakti* is independent and induces advanced *bhaktas* to bestow it on those that are innocent. The *bhakti* initially bestowed is the initial *śraddhā* or weak faith required to embark on the *bhakti* path of a *kaniṣṭha bhakta* or a novice *bhakta*. This faith is achieved by good fortune, as described earlier in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 2.23.5, and similarly in the *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*, “only by exceedingly good fortune does one acquire faith in service \(to Kṛṣṇa\).” 44  Both Jīva and Viśvanātha, commenting on this verse, clarify that this fortune is their “mental impressions arising from the association of great saints and so on.” 45  Therefore, it is evident from these statements that the source of this initial faith is contact with advanced *bhaktas* and it is this initial faith acquired, or *komala-śraddhā*, that qualifies one on the path of *bhakti* as a *kaniṣṭha-bhakta*.

Having illustrated how one receives initial or weak faith, I will now examine how that faith transforms and evolves into the firm or mature faith possessed by the *madhyama* or *uttama bhakta*. This transition is described in *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* 2.23.6–9:
>  
> From the association with holy men listening and praising arises, and in *sādhana-bhakti* all evil is eradicated. From the eradication of evil is firmness in *bhakti*, and from firmness, the appetite for listening and the rest is born. And from these appetites comes deep attachment to *bhakti*, and from this attachment the sprout of love for Krsna is born in the mind. When that *bhava* is deep, it has the name *prema*, that *prema* is the *prayojana*, the place of all bliss. 46  

In this passage, how faith gradually grows in *bhakti* is delineated, and the culmination of faith is exhibited as *prema* or love. Thus, in consideration of these passages and the statements explored so far in the* Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, it would be tempting to map out a *bhakta*’s progression as they embark and proceed on the path of *bhakti* in the following way. Having attained the status of a *kaniṣṭha bhakta*, possessing weak faith, there is no alternative for such a *bhakta* than to adhere to scriptural injunctions pertaining to *karma* whilst patiently associating with advanced *bhaktas* whose grace will nourish the novice’s faith further. At this point, it is essential for the *kaniṣṭha* practitioner alongside *sādhana-bhakti* to engage in *nitya* and *naimittika-karmas* and offer all their activities to the Supreme. In contrast, the *bhakta* who has attained mature faith may forego the burdens of *varṇāśrama* and engage only in *sādhana-bhakti*. However, those with weak faith remain secure on the path of *bhakti* by simultaneously participating in the *varṇāśrama* system, while holding in mind *karma*’s ultimate standing as subservient to *bhakti*. The *bhakta* should constantly place at the forefront of his mind the eventual goal, namely *prema*; prerequisites such as *karma*, though they may have some utility in realising the goal, nevertheless must eventually be rejected. The specific utility of *karma* and *varṇāśrama* is that they invite the influence of *sattva*, as described by Viśvanātha, who acknowledged in his comments to the *Bhagavad*-*gītā* that the practice of *karma* creates a conducive state of *sattva* that attracts the grace of the *bhaktas*. 47  Based on this reasoning following the injunctions pertaining to *karma* is regarded as essential only for the *kaniṣṭha bhakta*.

According to the above findings, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* establishes that the foremost Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava authors agree that *karma* has a valuable function for the *bhakta*, and is indeed a mandatory practice for a *kaniṣṭha-bhakta*, yet it is also acknowledged that it can be abandoned upon the fruition of mature faith. If the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava viewpoint on *karma* ended here it would suggest that there is no consciously developed public theology or public responsibility other than adopting *karma* until one is qualified to abandon it and subsequently fully immerse oneself in *bhakti*. This would also suggest that complete devotion to Kṛṣṇa is antithetical to engagement in worldly and political life. Furthermore, there could never be a text that extols a perfect society, as perfection is ultimately to be found outside the world in Kṛṣṇa’s presence. While this may still ultimately be true the remainder of this chapter deals with topics and themes that suggest there is more to consider on this matter. I will explore the obligation to scriptural injunctions pertaining to *karma* for those who have acquired mature faith, despite being beyond its authority. Can one with mature faith act in complete disregard of the social norms and conduct delineated by the injunctions and rules of *varṇāśrama*? This would have been a critical issue for a King who was striving for morality and religiosity amongst the members of his domains by employing *dharma-*based scriptures to provide guidelines and laws for the modes of orthodox living. Consequently, I will now turn to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theological perspective on moral expectations and the notion of *lokasaṅgraha*, or acting for the welfare of the people of the world, which appears to advocate a notion of public responsibility and engagement that is required regardless of the level of faith in *bhakti* attained.

## Moral and behavioural norms

Despite the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* illustrating that an individual possessing mature faith in *bhakti* is no longer bound by the jurisdiction of *karmic* injunctions, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* nevertheless proposes that such an individual is still required to operate within the boundaries of established moral and behavioural norms by referring to a series of passages extracted from Jīva’s *Bhakti-sandarbha* 172. This intriguing section revolves around a verse that features shortly after BP 11.20.8–9 discussed earlier, BP 11.20.27–28 conveys the following: 
>  
> One who has awakened faith in the narrations about me, being disgusted with all acts. Although he knows that sensual desires consist innately of suffering, he is incapable of relinquishing \[them\]. Thus, he remains delightful, faithful and with firm conviction should worship me, whilst participating \[in\] sensual pursuits, which conclude in suffering, \[in this state\] he repents. 48  

From our discussion of BP 11.20.8–9, it is inferred that the faith described in this section is mature faith and upon attaining this type of faith one is exempt from the jurisdiction of *karma*. BP 11.20.27–28 poses a significant challenge in the context of our discussions so far. This passage declares that one with mature faith is absolved of all violations due to transgressing the Vedic rules and regulations by engaging in *bhakti*, and it also declares that religious misconduct, while regrettable, does not disqualify the sincere practitioner on the path of *bhakti*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* highlights this verse to illustrate that such statements could potentially be misconstrued or even abused by unscrupulous persons who interpret them as endorsements for immoral behaviour and practices. This antinomian 49  standing of those who are devoted yet scripturally under no obligation to obey society’s ethical and moral stipulations was undoubtedly a critical concern for the King. This issue was perhaps exacerbated during the reign of Jaisingh II when specific groups were accused and on occasions expelled for eroding the authority of governing bodies and established norms. It is therefore evident that during the reign of Jaisingh II a tension emerged between laws of good governance and the theological positions of popular traditions that permitted the transgression of such laws. BP 11.20.27–28 was not the only problematic passage in this regard, as evidenced by the examination of BRS 1.2.63–64 earlier. Even the popular *Gītā* verse of 18.66 proved contentious, as here Kṛṣṇa relieves one from all consequences to violations if they take refuge in him. Such verses are problematic because they could be manipulated by deceitful persons who aspired to justify their transgressions based on the fundamental notion that *bhakti* supersedes the requirement to follow orthodox modes of conduct and offers atonement for violations of *dharma*. The danger of such an interpretation could culminate in the erosion of the efficacy of reprimands instigated by the King as a deterrent to potential disruptive social practices. To counteract such dangers, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* refers to Jīva, who presented careful interpretations to contentious passages like BP 11.20.27–28. Subsequently, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* draws on specific arguments that Jīva shares in BS 172 to provide a correct reading of such verses that counteracts theological rationalisations for engaging in immoral conduct.

*Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* refers to BS 172, which highlights that multiple Vaiṣṇava works stress that Vaiṣṇavas must abstain from violations of *dharma* and aspire to follow good behaviour; for instance, *Viṣṇu-dharma* states: “One who breaks the limit created by him, that human being is not a *Viṣṇu-bhakta*, for Hari is worshiped with good deeds.” 50  In the same text, it is stated: “When he abstains from violations of *dharma* and desires piety, then Hari situated in his heart can be known by man.” 51  It is also mentioned in the *Viṣṇu Purāṇa* 3.8.14, “Keśava is greatly pleased with those who never think of enjoying other’s wives, other’s wealth, or harming others.” 52  Thus, prominent Vaiṣṇava works emphasise the necessity of avoiding the transgression of orthodox behaviour. Jīva intentionally refers to core Vaiṣṇava texts to reinforce his position, illustrating scripturally that the avoidance of sinful behaviour is pleasing to Viṣṇu, and indeed, the pleasure of Viṣṇu is the ultimate aspiration for a *bhakta*.

The *Karma-vivṛti* also addresses this subject by referring to Jīva’s BS 172. Prior to BP 11.20.27–28, earlier in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* it is said:
>  
> And here, \[in this section of *Bhāgavatam*\] such sinful enjoyments are also forbidden in the case of *niṣkāma-karma*, in the upcoming words \(BP 11.20.10\) “one shouldn’t do any activity other than one’s duty” \(It is forbidden to perform even *kāmya* acts\), for when it is prescribed to abandon *karma*, giving up bad activities is already assumed as this is worse. 53  It is also said in the same section, enjoyments \[in this verse BP 11.20.28\] are only those that don’t create sins, because in all ways this is not endorsed in the scriptures in anyway. 54  

Jīva clarifies the nature of the “enjoyments” referred to in BP 11.20.27–28, declaring the “enjoyments” cannot be violations of *dharma* as this would conflict with the injunctions of scriptures. What to speak of violations of *dharma*, even acts such as *kāmya*-*karma* which are acceptable according to the injunctions of scriptures are discouraged due to their self-centred nature. 55  

Both the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and* Karma-vivṛti* turn extensively to Jīva’s *Bhakti-sandarbha* 172 to present alternative readings of BP 11.20.27–28, 56  which otherwise could have jeopardised expected moral and behavioural standards established in this era. This analysis highlights that even though Vaiṣṇavas possessing mature faith hold a privileged status that absolves them from the obligation to rigidly abide by the regulations and modes of conduct delineated by *karma*, nevertheless, there remains an onus to avoid sin and strive to sustain standards of personal noble conduct, and indeed, this mode of exemplary behaviour is expected to be exhibited especially by a *bhakta* who has attained mature faith due to his advanced position. The corrective reading of verses such as BP 11.20.27–28 by relying on Jīva illustrates the concern for suspect theological rationalisations that endorse unorthodox and unethical conduct.

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* also refers to BS 173, in which Jīva also offers further caution to the reader, stating that there are other ambiguous statements like BP 11.20.27–28 that could potentially be misconstrued to be endorsing the belief that there exists a license to transgress Vedic injunctions for one who has advanced on the path of *bhakti*. For instance, Jīva quotes the *Garuḍa Purāṇa*, which declares: “One who remembers the lotus-eyed Lord is pure both externally and internally.” 57  A literal reading of this verse would suggest that bathing would no longer be necessary for a Vaiṣṇava to be clean; it could also be interpreted to infer that codes of conduct delineated by established behavioural norms are also no longer significant. To thwart such dangers, Jīva counteracts such ideas by stressing that such unorthodox behaviour would contradict the noble conduct promoted by renowned saints such as Nārada and Vyāsa. Referring to the conduct expected for Vaiṣṇavas to follow, he states: “Yet although they have faith \[in such statements i.e. *Garuḍa Purāṇa* ‘One who remembers …’\], they still bathe out of respect, for the behaviour of the tradition of saints established by figures like the venerable Vyāsa and Nārada.” 58  “Otherwise, violation of such behaviour will become an offense. Hence, these saints have established a proper example for the world to prevent bad actions.” 59  To avoid misconceptions generated from such passages, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* references Jīva, who proposes that one should imitate the example of such *bhakti* saints who have comprehended the true import of statements such as this passage from the *Garuḍa Purāṇa*.

Another contentious verse referenced in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* that Jīva discusses is BG 9.30: “Even if one participates in heinous activities, if he worships me without deviation, he should certainly be considered saintly, because he is properly situated.” 60  Once again, there is a possibility that this verse may be misused, and so Jīva clarifies that although the nature of *śraddhā* here is qualified by the compound *ananya-bhāk*, “without deviation” 61  nevertheless such faith is not born via the understanding of *śāstrā*, but gained through worldly traditions. 62  This type of faith is also referenced in verses such as BG 17.1: “What is the position of those who forsake scriptural injunctions yet who worship with faith.” 63  In contrast, when one’s faith derived from scripture is awakened, there is no possibility of heinous activities. 64  Indeed, such acts contradict scriptures which bring satisfaction to Viṣṇu. 65  In other words, faith acquired in BG 9.30 is of an inferior status to faith derived from scripture. 66  If faith is derived from scripture then one recognises that transgressing the scriptural injunctions would displease Viṣṇu, thus conflicting with the very essence of a Vaiṣṇava, namely to please Viṣṇu.

Continuing to guard against misunderstandings of BG 9.30, Jīva also refers once again to the *Viṣṇu Purāṇa* 3.8.13 and the* Viṣṇu-dharma Purāṇa*, which I analysed earlier; these scriptures encourage obedience to behavioural and moral modes of conduct to satisfy Viṣṇu. 67  Jīva also states that BG 9.30 features the particle “*api*,” or “even,” in the phrase, which implies that heinous activity is to be rejected and not encouraged in any way. 68  In other words, such activities are rare exceptions and not the norm. In this way, improper behaviour in BG 9.30 is denounced emphatically according to Jīva. It is also stated in the subsequent verse that once a *bhakta* becomes fixed in righteousness, any last vestiges of impropriety will be abandoned; BG 9.31 declares, “Thus, he immediately becomes virtuous.” 69  Jīva also refers to the *Padma Purāṇa* to describe that such despicable behaviour in the name of God is condemned: “One who \(continues to\) commit violations on the strength of the sacred name of God cannot be purified by following any rules.” 70  By utilising Jīva’s corrective readings of potentially misconstrued passages in scriptures the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* highlights how such conflicting statements should be accurately understood so as not to compromise ideal moral behaviour.

This section examines the moral obligations of a *bhakti* practitioner; the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* presents a series of contentious verses illustrating the transcendent position of Vaiṣṇavas who have mature faith. Relying heavily on Jīva, the work exhibits that in spite of *bhakti* practitioners attaining a privileged status, it stresses the significance of conducting oneself according to time-honoured moral norms based on scriptural rulings and the exemplar models of saints. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* demonstrate that passages such as BP 11.20.27–28 found in scriptures are not intended to encourage or permit actions that contradict the codes of conduct defined by orthodox norms, nor are the references to the *Garuḍa Purāṇa* and BG 9.30 discussed. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* utilises the ingenuity of Jīva to emphatically illustrate that even if one achieves mature or firm faith in the practice of *bhakti*, they nevertheless still retain an obligation to adhere to orthodox forms of behaviour and conduct.

## Lokasaṅgraha

Having explored the theological significance of adhering to moral and behavioural norms according to the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, it was surmised that those who are beyond the jurisdiction of scriptural injunctions pertaining to *karma* by virtue of mature faith, nevertheless, follow them in accordance with previous saints for the satisfaction of Viṣṇu and therefore do not indulge in immoral and unorthodox modes of conduct, in this section I will explore a related yet distinct motivation for adhering to such injunctions. The notion of *lokasaṅgraha* denotes the responsibility to conduct oneself in a manner that benefits the people of the world or in other words, the adoption of public responsibility for the public good. The compound *loka-saṅgraha* comprises of “*loka*,” which conveys mankind or the world, and “*saṅgraha*,” which indicates protecting, maintaining or holding. Public responsibility is generally understood to be an ethical framework whereby an individual is obliged to act for the wider benefit of society at large. Thus, one’s actions are no longer determined by simply his own personal interests but also subject to the concerns of the wider community. The expression perhaps first appears in the BG* 3.20*  71  and epitomises the social and universal dimension of Kṛṣṇa’s teachings in the *Bhagavad-gītā*. Consequently, this notion has been promoted in recent history by those seeking political independence to justify political and social causes, with the aim of encouraging unity of purpose and a co-operative effort in society for a political cause. 72  

I will examine how the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* utilises the notion of *lokasaṅgraha*, endorsing how to partake in worldly life responsibly without fundamentally violating one’s ultimate commitment to *Kṛṣṇa-bhakti*. This section therefore centres on how the Gaudiya Vaiṣṇava tradition promotes social integration and the preservation of social order and norms for the benefit of others. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* begins addressing this subject by stating*:* 
>  
> First of all, for an independent *bhakta* with mature faith only *arcana* is prescribed. However, for one of weak faith and one who has mature faith dependent on benefitting the people of the world, *arcana* is taught mixed with *karma*. Both \[of those with mature faith\] are accepted as pure *bhaktas* due to the rejection of any fault in being mixed with *karma* by the discussion of the state of the cause of such *karma*. 73   

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* proposes here that one who has mature faith should engage in *karma* for the sake of the wider society and this in no way compromises his *bhakti*, to substantiate this stance the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* refers to Jīva citing *Bhakti-sandarbha* 284:
>  
> Therefore, there are two types of *arcana* – pure and mixed with *karma*. The first one, which is for those independent \[of scriptural rules\], who possess faith, is described by Āvirhotra: \(BP 11.3.47\) “One who \[desires to cut\] the knot in the heart…” And also spoken by Nārada: \(BP 4.29.46\) “When one is favored by the Lord, self-realized, that person gives up interest in society and in the Vedas.” *Agastya-saṁhitā* on this matter states: “As the prescriptions and prohibitions do not apply to a liberated person; in the same way, they do not touch one who worships Lord Rāma according to the prescriptions.” 74  
>  
> The second type of *arcana* \[mixed with *karma*\] is said to apply to those who have faith characterized by such things as excessive regard for worldly activities and the occasional execution of *bhakti*. Similarly, it also applies to householders who, although having faith that is contrary \[to that of the general public\], do not neglect the establishment of general Vedic *karma* for those who are ignorant of the path of *bhakti*. 75  In *Nārada-pañcarātra*, in the beginning of the discussion on faith, Śrī Nārāyaṇa says in the same way: 
> 
> > “O Nārada, even if one is perfect, if he doesn’t perform worldly *dharma* there will be degradation and thus diminishing of *dharma*. Therefore, all persons skilled in discrimination should protect worldly acts keeping it as it is until their death.” 76  

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* substantiates its stance on public responsibility by referring to the *Bhakti-sandarbha*, which in turn refers to the *Agastya-saṁhitā*, *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* and *Nārada-pañcarātra*. Jīva describes two types of worshippers or *bhakti* practitioners: one whose *bhakti* is pure and independent of scriptural injunctions, and the other whose *bhakti* is mixed with *karma* and therefore obliged to perform Vedic rituals. The second category of *bhakti* practitioners also includes those pure householders who, although empowered with mature faith, are still obliged to perform Vedic *karma* for the sake of encouraging the general public to abide by such religious principles. The chart in Figure 4.1 depicts the description delineated in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*.

*Figure 4.1* Role of lokasaṅgraha. **Two Types of Bhakti (Arcana)**

- **Only Arcana**
    - Nirapeksa - independent of Karma
    - Pure Bhakta
    - Mature Faith
    - BP 11.3.47
    - BP 4.29.46
- **Arcana mixed with Karma (Karma-miśra)**
    - **Acts for Lokasaṅgraha**
        - Executes Karma for the benefit of others otherwise diminishing of dharma
        - Mature faith
        - Pure Bhakta
    - **Acts due to Worldly Attachment**
        - Executes Karma due to attachment
        - Weak faith
        - Under authority of Karma

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* also offers an intriguing perspective on BP 11.27.11, as cited in BS 284:

> \(BP 11.27.11\) “*Karmas* such as the worship of the *sandhyas* which are prescribed by the Vedas, one should execute this as worship to me with complete resolve, that *karma* is purified.” 77  Activities such as the worship of *sandhya* acts i.e. *nitya* and *naimittika karmas*. By these i.e. by these activities, one should perform the worship completely. 
> 
> He who does not perform them, because of possibility of fault, will result in the incompleteness of the worship. *Karma* is purified i.e. for he who performs *karma*, the mixture of *karma* with *bhakti* does not lead to fault. 78  

In this passage, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* emphasises that *nitya* and *naimittika karmas* must be executed to complete worship; in other words if one doesn’t perform them their worship is considered deficient. These readings of scriptural verses attempt to alleviate any fears a *bhakta* may have in engaging in *karma* and stresses the obligation to *karma* they hold if they are involved in public life. This reflects the overarching concern over the adoption of *karma* in this period. Such perspectives were undoubtedly spurred on by the politico-religious pressures of the day that inspired the promotion of orthodox practices such as *karma*.

These passages declare that for one positioned within the public domain, conducting oneself appropriately for the sake of the wider society is essential, even if one possessed mature faith in *bhakti*. Failure to operate in this manner presented a risk for the less faithful due to the possible premature imitation of advanced  *bhaktas*, resulting in inappropriate modes of behaviour in the guise of *bhakti* practice. 

This requirement applies particularly to very mature practitioners who are actively engaged in society, such as the *gṛhasthas* or householders possessing mature faith as noted by Jīva.+++(4)+++ Such a responsibility is incumbent upon the socially active *bhakta* in spite of the internal independence from the injunctions of *karma* arising from an unshakable faith in the path of *bhakti*. 

This is primarily because the *bhakta* is stationed within the confines of a community and must act for the long-term interests of his fellow members. The reader is warned that failure to behave in this way for the sake of the society as a whole will result in diminishing of *dharma*. 

Kṛṣṇadeva also refers to this passage in the *Karma-vivṛti* and comments that the term “householder” is but a partial description of those who are eligible, and indeed, the authority of *karma* also extends to the members of the other *āśramas*, i.e. *brahmacārīs*, *vānaprasthas* and monks. +++(4)+++ 

It is expected that the *bhakta* possessing mature faith engage in *karma* because it is their responsibility to encourage the common man, whose faith is weak. 79  

Kṛṣṇadeva’s proposition expands the extent of responsibility pertaining to *lokasaṅgraha* and claims it is the responsibility of not only *gṛhasthas* or householders to set ideal standards for the wider society but of members of all *āśramas* within the *varṇāśrama* social body, illustrating the concerted effort to propagate a broader awareness for all members of the public arena regarding their individual responsibilities to uphold ideals and standards.

In the *Karma-vivṛti* Kṛṣṇadeva also offers further insights into the notion of *lokasaṅgraha* by referring to the *Nārada-pañcarātra* and *Bhagavad-gīta*. The* Nārada-pañcarātra*,* Lakṣmī-saṁhitā*, chapter seventeen states:

> If in this situation, one should surrender to Janārdana \(Lord of living beings\) and Jaganātha \(Lord of world\), indeed if only once this type of discussion on the meaning of scripture is made, this discussion causes such a man to swim across \[the ocean of worldly existence attaining salvation\], resulting in the union of unfavourable and favourable conditions. 
> 
> On account of this one who is absent of this devotion is at a loss and when there is a possibility of this loss, one needs to perform atonement. In the case of the means of acceptance. Even though helpfulness has been accepted still in that case also atonement indeed is to be done. 
> 
> In order for *dharma* not to be destroyed, for the purification of the family, to guide people, and to establish behavioural norms and for my pleasure, Viṣṇu, the God of Gods, who holds the bow made of a horn, an intelligent man should not transgress the prescribed Vedic practice even mentally. 
> 
> Indeed, just as a person favoured by a king would be pierced by a spike if he breaks a beautiful channel that has been built by the King, which is useful to many people, and causes ample crops to grow, even if he doesn’t expect anything personally from this. Similarly, a person who breaks the behavioural norms created by the Vedas, even though dear to me, still he won’t be considered to be dear to me, because of going against My orders. 80   

The *Nārada-pañcarātra* outlines the principles of *bhakti*. In this passage, the significance of following prescribed Vedic duties is stressed. As well as following such prescribed standards for the benefit of others in one’s community, one should also follow them for the sake of pleasing the Lord. Applying an analogy, the Lord explains that by not following the injunctions from the scriptures in order to maintain exemplary behavioural and social standards great displeasure is experienced by him, even if one is very dear to him.

Kṛṣṇadeva follows this citation with a well-known passage from the *Bhagavad-gītā*, BG 3.19–26. 81  In this series of passages, Kṛṣṇa declares that *karma* is to be executed for the benefit of others, because whatever exemplary leaders enact others will imitate. In this regard Kṛṣṇa shares the examples of the celebrated king Janaka and even himself, emphasising that although free from all obligations pertaining to *karma*, they both accepted the path of *karma* in order to establish an ideal standard for others subject to the authority of prescribed *karmas*. By citing such examples who embody the principle of *lokasaṅgraha*, it was hoped that this would inspire the social orders to be upheld, resulting in the purity of the general populace.

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* advocates the critical importance of *lokasaṅgraha* and cites a range of arguments to do so. The text promotes the responsibility to follow scriptural injunctions pertaining to *karma* for the sake of inspiring an ideal for those that would otherwise not be inclined to respect such injunctions. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and even the *Karma-vivṛti*, which we refer to intermittently, largely draw on Jīva’s *Bhakti-sandarbha* to provide theological substantiation to support the assertion that those who possess mature faith should nevertheless perform *karma* outwardly for the benefit of the general public. Although this *karma* may resemble the practice of those who have weak faith, for those who have mature faith it does not in any way compromise their elevated status or degrade their faith. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* even advocates that *nitya* and *naimittika karma* must be executed for worship of the Lord to be considered complete, and also warns that if a socially engrossed advanced *bhakta* doesn’t engage in *karma* for the sake of others, they will suffer a drawback. Kṛṣṇadeva in the *Karma-vivṛti* also refers to the *Nārada-pañcarātra* and the *Bhagavad-gīta* to further reinforce the scriptural significance of *lokasaṅgraha*. Kṛṣṇadeva also proposes that social responsibilities governed by the *varṇāśrama* system are the responsibility of not only *bhaktas* that are householders but all members of the various *aśramas*, even those who are ascetically inclined. These passages provide significant insights in light of our prior discussion examining the juncture at which *karma* can be abandoned; clearly for the authors of these works, Vaiṣṇavas have a social responsibility regardless of their level of faith in *bhakti*, and the authors deployed innovative theological compositions to persuade *bhakti* practitioners that *varṇāśrama* injunctions and social order are integral to the practice of *bhakti*.

In examining the topics of morality and *lokasaṅgraha* it is evident that there is a public theology which operates beyond the notion of adopting *karma* until one is qualified to abandon it. It is also revealed that for the Gaudiya Vaiṣṇava sect there is a public responsibility to follow scriptural codes and norms pertaining to *karma* and *varṇāśrama* not only to encourage and educate others but also because adhering to such rules is satisfying to Viṣṇu regardless of one’s level of faith. This also crucially demonstrates that the practice of *bhakti* to Kṛṣṇa and engagement in worldly acts governed by *varṇāśrama* can function alongside each other even at the highest levels of *bhakti*. In the following section I will share guidelines set out in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* to help navigate worldly actions for a *bhakti* practitioner, so as not to compromise one’s status and continued progress on the path of *bhakti*.

## How should a **bhakta** with mature faith execute **karma**?

If one possessing mature faith in *bhakti* is required to indulge in worldly modes of living derived from prescribed duties defined by *karma*, how should one conduct themselves without compromising their elevated standing in *bhakti*? In other words, how does one who has transcended the scriptural injunctions concerning *karma* nevertheless engage in prescribed *varṇāśrama* duties without succumbing to worldly contamination or influence that could possibly jeopardise their standing in *bhakti*? To address this vital matter, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* once again refers to select passages from Jīva’s *Bhakti-sandarbha*, firstly BS 285 followed by BS 238:
>  
> The system of *karma* for these persons is prescribed in two ways. The first which is set forth in books like *Nārada-pañcarātra*, is the worship of everything by seeing all as Bhagavān who is situated in one’s heart. The second is provided in scriptures like the *Viṣṇu-yamala*: “One should perform the satisfactory rites for ancestors only with the water that has washed Lord Viṣṇu’s feet. One should worship a god other than Viṣṇu only with food offered to Viṣṇu.” 82  

According to Jīva, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas who accept *bhakti* as their ultimate aspiration should participate in *karma* with two critical principles in mind. Firstly, one should observe the Lord everywhere as present in the heart of all beings, and secondly, offerings to ancestors and other gods should only be made after first being offered to Viṣṇu. Imbibing these principles ensures that Viṣṇu remains the object of devotion irrespective of the *bhakta*’s activities. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* provides further insights into these two principles to emphasise that such actions are not contrary to the path of *śuddha-bhakti*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* proposes the following:
>  
> The worship of other gods should be done with the vision that Bhagavān or Viṣṇu is present within the gods. Furthermore, *śraddhā* rites \[to ancestors\] should be performed with the *prasāda* of Bhagavān according to the guidelines of *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*. In this way, he \(Sanātana\) makes it known that *karmas* are not contradictory to *śuddha-bhakti*. Therefore, it is accepted in his commentary to the words “*na rodhayati …*” in the section about the glories of *sat-saṅga*, that even such *karmas* fall within *śuddha-bhakti*. 83  

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, building on Jīva’s presentation, states that other gods if worshipped should be approached with the understanding that Viṣṇu is present within them. 

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* also refers to Sanātana’s* Hari-bhakti-vilāsa*, which is the ritual text for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, and thus the ideal manual from which to approach rituals pertaining to *karma* for the tradition. If these guidelines are adopted whilst adhering to ritual injunctions, one’s pure *bhakti* status is preserved despite one’s *karmic* conduct. 

Further performative guidelines for modes of worldly conduct for a *bhakta* are offered in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* by referring to *Bhakti-sandarbha* 238, which states:

> In that section, the words “*agnihotra* and so on” enter into *bhakti* \[status\] because of satiating the fire, and so on, as it’s the dwelling of Bhagavān who is the *antaryāmī* \[of the fire\]. And digging wells and creating gardens are also included in *bhakti* because of being performed for sake of serving the Supreme. These activities also fall within *bhakti*, since they are done for the purpose of worshipping Bhagavān, and this also shows \[that *karmas* aren’t contradictory to *bhakti*\]. 84  

The broad scope of *bhakti* is expounded here, whether it be *agnihotras*, or digging wells or creating gardens if they are performed for the pleasure of the Supreme, all are considered *bhakti*. 

What is remarkable is that  
the internal motivation underlying a *karmic* activity  
is what determines its classification as *bhakti* and not the activity itself.  
The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* comments on this passage as follows:

> By this passage if *tatra* \(in that section\) is taken in another way, there would be a disruption in the flow of \[Jīva’s\] argument with acceptance of something which has not been discussed earlier. “In *bhakti*” \(see earlier\) means in “*śuddha-bhakti*.” 
> 
> The digging of wells and creation of gardens which are performed for the sake of serving the Supreme \(are included in *śuddha-bhakti*\) due to the acceptance of *śuddha-bhakti* to include all actions for the sake of the Supreme. 
> 
> Otherwise, the proposal \[described\] up until the method of seeing the inner being in all beings would be considered meaningless, even if the perfection \[described\] is only *bhakti* \[practised\] by *aropa-siddhi* and so forth. Even when there is *bhakti* mixed with *karma*, he rejects the idea of mixed *karma*. 85  

The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* provides clarification to the nature of *bhakti* described in BS 238. The author of the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* contends that it should be considered nothing other than *śuddha-bhakti*, reasoning that the placement of this passage within Jīva’s overall argument in this section indicates this. The work also argues that although the *bhakti* practices described may appear to be mixed with *karma*, it is however not tainted by *karma*, even though *karma* is enacted.

According to the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, being conscious of Viṣṇu within everyone and everything is central to maintaining the status of *śuddha-bhakti* when performing *karma*, which may entail worshipping gods other than Viṣṇu, or executing activities that appear to be *karma* or mixed with *karma*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* bases its presentation in this regard primarily on the *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* and Jīva’s* Bhakti-sandarbha*. Kṛṣṇadeva in the *Karma-vivṛti* adopts a similar stance, declaring that even the worship of other gods by the *bhakta* falls within the boundaries of *śuddha-bhakti* and not *karma* if the *bhakta* views other gods as either forms of Bhagavān or as His subjects, or as His representatives, and consequently that worship transforms into a form of direct worship of Bhagavān. 86  He reinforces this claim by drawing on two verses from the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, BP 5.19.26 and BP 6.4.28. 87  Therefore, as long as one offers respects to other gods whilst being mindful of the exalted position of Kṛṣṇa, one may partake in such worship whilst continuing to progress on the path of *śuddha-bhakti*. Kṛṣṇadeva in the *Karma-vivṛti* also quotes Jīva’s *Bhakti-sandarbha* 106, which states: “One should worship Brahmā and Śiva as Vaiṣṇavas. Thus, some exclusive *bhaktas* consider Śiva as either a Vaiṣṇava, or a manifestation of the Lord. And so, by worshipping someone as the Lord’s servant great benefit is attained. On the contrary, neglect can be considered an offence.” 88  Thus, Kṛṣṇadeva provides reassurances that worshipping other gods and *bhakti* are indeed compatible, under the condition that the *bhakta* view other gods as Vaiṣṇavas, servants of Viṣṇu or as representatives of Viṣṇu or forms of Viṣṇu. Both the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and *Karma-vivṛti* build their presentations upon Jīva’s teachings. These works aim to provide guidelines to navigate worldly affairs for *bhakti* practitioners of all levels of faith and provide assurances that such activities, even the worship of other gods, if performed according to the directions of authorities such as Jīva, will not compromise one’s faith and progress on the path of pure *bhakti*.

## Summaries

In the concluding segments of the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and the *Karma-vivṛti*, a summary of their positions pertaining to the role of *karma* for a *bhakti* practitioner is outlined. I will firstly share the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*’s summary:
>  
> Now, these are the stages. Firstly, there is complete faith in actions. Then, from the execution of that, \[one attains\] mixed faith, a portion of \[faith\] in *karma* and *bhakti* due to the power of the association of *bhaktas* who have mixed desires for only *bhakti*. Then, by this they execute *bhakti* with mixed desires only for *bhakti*. 89  

This account illustrates the progression of a *bhakta* in relation to *karma*. His faith initially entirely resides in *karma*; however, due to the association of *bhaktas*, one’s faith progresses so that now it dwells in both *karma* and *bhakti*. This denotes a mixed type of faith directed to both *karma* and *bhakti*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* then describes a form of *karma* practice which impedes the execution of *śuddha* or pure *bhakti* as follows:
>  
> Due to the two-fold nature of *karma* by the division of it concealing *bhakti* and not concealing *bhakti*, mixed *karma* is also two-fold, conflicting with pure *bhakti* \(*śuddha-bhakti\)* and not conflicting. Among them, *karma* performed with even a portion of passionate \(*rājas*\) faith, covers *bhakti*. It is also an impediment to *bhakti* to produce love \(*prema\)* directly. However, there is another type of *karma* that doesn’t cover *bhakti*. From this we see that the mixing of inferior types of *karma* eclipses pure *bhakti*, and it is categorised within the realm of *karma-miśra-bhakti*. 90  

In this description* bhakti* mixed with *karma* is defined according to two divisions, one which masks *bhakti* and the other which does not. If *karma* covers *bhakti* it hinders the practice of *śuddha-bhakti*. This is known as *karma-miśra-bhakti*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* proceeds referring to Jīva’s BS 225, which outlines three types of *karma-miśra-bhakti* which cover *bhakti*, he states: “In this regard, there are three types of *bhakti* mixed with *karma* possible: \(1\) desiring sensual pursuits \(2\) desiring liberation \(3\) and desiring only *bhakti*.” 91  The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* offers the following comments on BS 225:
>  
> So, in this way, even faith in *karma* arises partially for the person qualified for desiring only *bhakti* \(*because it is still a state of karma-miśra\)*, which results in *bhakti* covered by *karma*, because of the intentional mixture of *karma*. Then, there would occur the covering of *karma* \[whenever\] there is such a mixed nature \[then\] how can pure *jñāna* or pure *bhakti* arise? Such doubt will appear. Thus, it is only faith in *karma*, although internal, that covers *bhakti* and not *karma* itself. Hence, in statements like “*anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam*” and so on \(in the definition of *bhakti*\) it is not stated *bhakti* is devoid of *karma* and *jñāna*, it is only stated that it is not covered by them. 92  

Three types of *karma-miśra-bhaktas* are described by Jīva; the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* highlights that even the third type, those who only desire *bhakti*, remain *karma-miśra-bhaktas* as *karma* still covers *bhakti*. However, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* reassures the reader that there is indeed a *karma-bhakti* practice that doesn’t cover *bhakti* as long as faith in *karma* does not eclipse one’s faith in *bhakti*. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* refers to Rūpa’s key verse in *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu* 1.1.11 93  to verify this proposition as it highlights that *karma* should not cover *bhakti \(anāvṛtam\)* rather than the practice of *karma* having to be shunned entirely \(*śūnyaṃ*\). These passages clarify the nature of *karma-miśra-bhakti*, and how this classification entails mixed faith in both *karma* and *bhakti*; however, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* reassures the reader that there is a *karma-bhakti* practice that does not jeopardise the status of *śuddha-bhakti* as long one’s faith resides solely in *bhakti* and not *karma*. Returning to the stages of progression for a *bhakta* in relation to *karma*, following the *karma-miśra-bhakti* stage, the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* states*:*  
>  
> Then, there is faith in pure *bhakti* due to the power of the association of pure *bhaktas*. From there, a \[*bhakta*\] of weak faith executes *bhakti* along with the execution of some *karma* in the form of *nitya* and *naimittika*, and some *karma* prescribed with the vision of *antaryāmi \(e.g. agnihotra\)*, following which, a \[*bhakta*\] of mature faith executes *bhakti* along with the execution of *karma* according to what was earlier said, being dependent on benefiting the people of the world. From there, an independent \[*bhakta*\] executes pure *bhakti* from which shortly after the manifestation of love \[for Kṛṣṇa\] appears with the complete removal of unwanted desires. This is the qualification for pure *bhakti*. 94  

This passage completes the concluding summary from the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*. Once again, the influence of the association of *bhaktas* is stressed to demonstrate how this elevates an individual to an advanced stage of practice. Furthermore, both those with weak and mature faith in pure *bhakti* engage in *karma*, however with varying motivations. The passage also describes the final goal for a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava, *prema* or love for Kṛṣṇa which is experienced by the independent *bhakta* or *nirapekṣa*. The chart in Figure 4.2 illustrates the stages of progression described in the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*. 
    *Figure 4.2* Stages of Progression for a bhakta whilst executing karma.  
The conclusion of the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* illustrates that both *bhakti* and *karma* can coexist under specific conditions of which extensive guidelines have been provided in the work. The crucial element that determines the quality of one’s *bhakti* corresponds with where one’s faith is reposed. Therefore, a *bhakta* must be careful where they position their faith, and preserve it in *bhakti* only; subsequently, the external performance of *karma* is not fundamentally an impediment to the practice of pure *bhakti* in light of this theological understanding. Hence, regardless of the degree of faith an individual possesses in *bhakti* if obliged to execute *karma*, one can safely engage in the practice, whilst keeping in mind the ultimate aspiration.

Having outlined the closing summary of *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya*, I will now proceed to disclose the concluding synopsis from the *Karma-vivṛti* of Kṛṣṇadeva, who states the following:
>  
> This is the conclusion, those who have taken initiation from Viṣṇu, *brāhmaṇas* and others, need to operate diligently under the authority of *karma* before they become eligible for pure *bhakti*, for the sake of avoiding a calamity, and for the sake of pleasing the Lord, only complete work should be performed. This \[execution of *karma*\] would be *āropa-siddha-bhakti* or *saṅga-siddha-bhakti*.  95  

As examined in the previous chapter the offering of *karma* to the Supreme is an authorised form of *bhakti* outlined by Jīva in the *Bhakti-sandarbha* known as *āropa-siddha-bhakti* or *saṅga-siddha-bhakti*. This is the type of *karma* adopted upon initiation; the *Karma-vivṛti* further states in regard to this type of *karma* the following:
>  
> In that case also, it should be executed with a desire to attain pure *bhakti*, and not with any other desire. When in one arises the eligibility of a *kaniṣṭha-adhikārī* with weak faith, for the sake of avoiding calamity, he should perform some *karma*, thinking oneself as a servant of the Lord, following his orders, he should execute only obligatory and occasional works \(*nitya*- and *naimittika-karmas*\). This is to be performed and offered to the Lord; however, this should be performed only in the mood of a servant. And it is stated in *Hari-bhakti-vilāsa* \(8.409\): “Thus one should offer one’s own *karma* and also one’s own self to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, by being a servant, by chanting the mantra thrice.” 96  

Here Kṛṣṇadeva outlines the responsibilities of an individual who embarks on the path of *śuddha-bhakti*, at the stage of a* kaniṣṭha*. Such a person engages in only *nitya*- and *naimittika-karmas*, avoiding *kāmya-karmas* and so on, simultaneously meditating on one’s identity as a servant of the Lord, in this way he advances steadily. The *Karma-vivṛti* further states:
>  
> However, when the eligibility of *uttama*- or *madhyama* status has arisen, with mature faith, one should perform *karma* to benefit the people of the world. Then, as King Ambarīṣa, one has to do all obligatory and occasional works like sacrifices for the sake of bringing joy to the Lord, by seeing Him within everything, and thinking this an execution of the order of the Lord. This is to be done by all. 97  

When an individual attains mature faith the notion of *lokasaṅgraha* becomes the motivating factor for the execution of *karma*. One should also execute *karma* continually mindful of the Lord’s omnipresence, considering the *karma*s to be the orders of the Lord bringing pleasure to him. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja is provided as the example to be followed. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja features in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, where he is described as both the greatest emperor and the greatest *bhakta* of his time. Despite holding the social position of a worldly King, he served the Supreme with unwavering determination and faith. His qualities are especially glorified in the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* in the relation to his dealings with Durvāsa Muni, a powerful *yogī*. 98  Kṛṣṇadeva continues:
>  
> In this way only, both one who is eligible for *rāgānugā-bhakti* mixed with *vaidhī*, when a strong taste has not arisen, and one who is eligible for mainly *rāgānugā-bhakti*, when a strong taste has arisen, have to perform all *karmas* for the sake of benefiting the people of the world. Specifically, the performance of *karma* for the sake of benefiting the people of the world by a person eligible for mainly *rāgānugā-bhakti* is to be done because it is common to all. It is with the vision that he is following the good behaviour of the *rāgātmika-siddha-bhakta* who is his role model. 99  

Kṛṣṇadeva’s dedication to the promotion of *karma* is highlighted here, as he makes an unprecedented request, that even those who reach the highest stages of *bhakti*, *rāgānuga-bhakti* with taste, should continue to engage in *karma*. He also connects following the model of the *rāgātmika-siddha-bhakta* with the execution of *karma* for the sake of benefiting the people of the world. This is a fascinating claim and likely to have been a response to the followers of Rūpa Kavirāja and similar individuals that were encouraging their followers to practise *rāgānuga-bhakti* in a way that disregarded rules pertaining to orthodox forms of engagement such as *karma*. Kṛṣṇadeva’s presentation sought to counteract the violation of the codes of conduct generated by the imitation of the residents of Vṛndāvana such as the *gopīs* as per *rāgānuga-bhakti* practice. As discussed in Chapter 2 the King faced a widespread problem within Vṛndāvana and Jaipur, concerning apparent *bhakti* practitioners imitating the residents of Vṛndāvana in dress, customs, behaviour and so on, leading to disruptions in the social orders. In response, Kṛṣṇadeva declares that following the example of the *rāgātmika-siddha-bhaktas* rather necessitated the adoption of responsible orthodox practices defined by *karma* for the sake of others in the wider society. Recalling Rūpa’s key verse on this issue described in BRS 2.295, 100  the intentions of Rūpa within this verse were a matter of contention. The conspicuous dearth of further clarification upon this verse from its creator invited numerous clashing interpretations. 101  Kṛṣṇadeva, Jaisingh II’s trustworthy aide had been tasked to refute the explanations of Rūpa Kavirāja in the courts of Jaipur. Upon Kṛṣṇadeva’s successful rebuttal, Rūpa Kavirāja’s works were considered unlawful and forbidden in Jaipur and Vṛndāvana. Thus, in the *Karma-vivṛti* we further observe Kṛṣṇadeva continuing his refutation of Rūpa Kavirāja’s problematic stance. In this case, Kṛṣṇadeva stresses that the principle of *lokasaṅgraha* should be adopted even at the highest stages of *bhakti*; hence one should embrace *karma* outwardly and this is indeed considered imitating the *rāgātmika-siddha-bhakta*. This also resembles Kṛṣṇadeva’s earlier claim that the notion of *lokasaṅgraha* is the concern not only of *bhaktas* that are householders but of all members of the various *aśramas*, even those who were ascetically inclined or even those possibly beyond the *varṇāśrama* systems, practising primarily the *rāgānuga-bhakti* practice, such as the *bābājīs* of Vṛndāvana. Through such declarations we can infer that Kṛṣṇadeva, under the influence of Jaisingh II, broadened the scope of *lokasaṅgraha* or public responsibility, so that all members within Jaisingh II’s domains were compelled to heed to the responsibility of engaging in orthodox prescribed acts of *varṇāśrama* defined by the path of *karma*, even at the very highest stages of *bhakti*. Table 4.4 presents Kṛṣṇadeva’s summary.
*Table 4.4* Kṛṣṇadeva on karma–bhakti relations   Type of ***bhakta***  Faith in ***bhakti***   ***Karma***       
Neophyte Vaiṣṇava 102  

Very weak 

Execute* karma* and offer *karma* to the supreme as* āropa-siddha-bhakti* or *saṅga-siddha bhakti* 

*Kaniṣṭha* 

Weak 

Execute* nitya/naimittika-karma* only with desire to attain pure *bhakti*, in the spirit of a servant of the Lord, e.g. HBV 8.409

*Madhyama/Uttama* 

Mature 

Execute *karma* for the sake of benefiting the people of the world. For the sake of pleasing the Lord and executing his order whilst seeing the Lord within everything, e.g. King *Ambarīṣa* 

*Rāgānuga-bhakti* mixed with *vaidhī* with no taste and with strong taste 

Mature 

Execute *karma* for the sake of benefiting the people of the world, thus following the good behaviour of the *rāgātmika-siddha-bhakta* who is his role model 

In both the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and the *Karma-vivṛti*, the promotion of the practice of *karma* as a central feature for public responsibility irrespective of the level of *bhakti* an individual has attained is stressed. These works accomplish this task by profusely referring to the authoritative teachings of Jīva in particular, an influential figure to the readers of these respective texts. The *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* reassures the *bhakti* practitioner that as long as one’s faith is not concealed by *karma* then one has not in any way compromised their standing as a pure *bhakta* even at the most advanced stages. Thus, the execution of *karma* in itself does not impede one’s progress on the *bhakti* path. Kṛṣṇadeva’s proposal that the notion of public responsibility to benefit the wider society by executing *karma* extends to even one practising *rāgānuga-bhakti* and his claim that this follows the ideal set by the *rāgātmika-siddha-bhaktas* symptomises the obligation to adopt *karma* and adhere to orthodox forms of public conduct within this era, stemming from pressures emanating from the verdicts established in the Jaipur courts. Consequently, works like the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* and the *Karma-vivṛti* became timely theological devices to define and expand public responsibility in response to the mounting concerns surrounding orthodox public engagement in this period.

## Conclusion

The scarcity of works pertaining to the precise role of *karma* in the public sphere within the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect appeared to indicate a lack of interest or concern over responsible public engagement. However, in this era we witness the production of specialised works such as the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* which strive to provide sound theological reasoning to endorse conscientious public conduct. In this chapter, primarily through the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* I traversed several significant and interrelated themes that encompass features of public theology. Having established the compatibility of *karma* and *bhakti*, and how *karma* functions as a pathway to *bhakti*, it became apparent that devotion to Kṛṣṇa, the ultimate objective of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, was in no way contingent upon the enactment of social duties. It was also agreed that the defining quality of the path of *bhakti* is faith or *śraddhā*, which qualifies one to abandon *karma*, and it was established that this *śraddhā* is only attained by the grace of the pure and advanced *bhaktas*. Nevertheless, in consideration of principles such as *lokasaṅgraha* and the theological significance of adhering to moral and behavioural norms, even the advanced *bhakta* must participate responsibly in the mundane world for the sake of others without fundamentally violating one’s commitment to *Kṛṣṇa*-*bhakti*. These novel compilations produced in this era reassure *bhakti* practitioners that partaking in *karma* does not disrupt one’s progress in *bhakti*, which is determined solely by where one’s faith is disposed, and subsequently provide precautionary measures and guidelines to ensure that one’s faith resides only within *bhakti*. This perspective indicates that socially active Vaiṣṇavas should endure the less-than-ideal circumstances in the mundane sphere, complying with customs pertaining to *karma* even though these may be deemed to be intrinsically bereft of *bhakti* in and of themselves. Thus, *bhaktas* are expected to act astutely and responsibly, discerning the demands of public responsibility in whatever environment they may discover themselves bound within.

Central to the *karma* and *varṇāśrama* promoted by the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* is the conviction that pure *bhakti* for Krsna is the ultimate purpose of life, culminating in *prema* or love for Krsna. Therefore, although *bhakti* ultimately overrides *varṇāśrama-dharma*, there is nevertheless a form of *varṇāśrama-dharma* that operates in conjunction with *bhakti* even at its highest stages without compromising one’s ambitions on the *bhakti* path. Although, the Gauḍīyas Vaiṣṇava sect had elected not to entirely dismiss the *varṇāśrama* scheme, nor were they especially strong advocates of it. However, in this period due to political pressures, sects were compelled to acknowledge *karma*’s utility. To avoid possible reprimands the Gauḍīyas Vaiṣṇava sect were obliged to accede to the outward customs of *varṇāśrama* wherever and so long as these demarcated the prevailing social orders in the public arena. This reconfiguration of public behaviour was spurred on by cases such as that of Rūpa Kavirāja which exemplified why the *varṇāśrama* system became significant in this period, as it demonstrated that premature renunciation and improper imitation of the residents of Vṛndāvana would inevitably lead to moral impropriety in the guise of treading the *bhakti* path. Consequently, in this period it was deemed that *bhakti* practice would have fared better had individuals honestly pursued the path of *bhakti* within the safe confines of the *varṇāśrama* system.

## Notes

1.  In Bahura’s catalogue it is listed under the title *savāyi jayasimha-kāritā granthāḥ* or works caused by Jaisingh II. Although some texts listed here were authored by Jaisingh II – hence it is plausible that it was composed by the King – it is also likely that this text was authored by a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scholar, perhaps Kṛṣṇadeva, considering his close connection to the court. However, no explicit authorship is mentioned in the text. 
2.  In the list of works connected to Jaisingh II, links to Rāma feature frequently, indicative of Jaisingh II’s early devotion to Rāma. Later, his devotional inclination appears to switch to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa perhaps due to his association with Vṛndavāna and the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect, in his role as the Governor of Mathura and Agra \(Bahura, *Literary Heritage of the Rulers of Amber and Jaipur*, p. 62\). 
3.  Kṛṣṇadeva: tṛtīyaṃ ca tasya dvayasyaiva dvāra-bhūtaṃ karmārpaṇa-rūpam iti \(and the third \[*karma*\] is that which acts as a gateway to the other two \[*jñāna* and *bhakti*\], which is of the form of offering action\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 221\).  
Viśvanātha: tatra api bhakti-yogasya ati-rahasyatvāt ubhaya-sanjīvakatvena abhyarhitatvāt sarva-durlabhatvāt ca madhyavartī kṛtaḥ. \(*Bhakti* is placed in the middle between *karma* and *jñāna* because it is mysterious, difficult to attain, more honoured because it gives life to the other two.\) \(Statement found in the introduction to his *Sārārtha-varṣiṇī* or *Gītā* commentary.\)  
4.  ananuṣṭhānato doṣo bhakty-aṇgānāṃ prajāyate, na karmaṇām akaraṇād eṣa bhakyadhikāriṇām, niṣiddhācārato daivāt prayaścittaṃ ca nocitam iti vaiṣṇava-śāstrāṇāṃ rahasyaṃ tad-vidāṃ matam \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, MS 2669, Kashmohor collection, Pothīkhānā, City Palace, Jaipur, p. 5b\) and \(Monika Horstmann, p. 265\). 
5.  atha śrī-bhagavad-bhaktānāṃ varṇāśrama-vihita-karmādhikāro nāsti iti vicāryate \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1a\). 
6.  etad eva bhagavac-chrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-mahāprabhū-saṃpradāyācārya-śrī-sanātana-rūpa-jīva-gosvāminām api abhimataṃ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 3a\). 
7.  Monika Horstmann, p. 257 and p. 270. 
8.  tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta na nirvidyeta yāvatā māt-kathā-śravaṇādau vā śraddhā yāvan na jāyate iti. 
9.  dṛḍha-śraddhā. 
10.  atra śraddhā-pādena dṛḍha-śraddhā eva prāptvāpy agre śraddhāluḥ dṛḍha-niścaya iti ukteḥ vyākhyātaṃ ca śrīdhara-svāmi-caraṇaiḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1a\). 
11.  bhaktyaiva sarvam bhaviṣyati iti dṛḍha-niścayaḥ sant iti \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1a\). 
12.  BP 11.11.32 \(evaṃ ājñāyaivaṃ guṇān doṣān mayādiṣṭān api svakān । dharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān māṁ bhajeta sa ca sattamaḥ\) In this way, “Knowing thus the virtues and faults which are taught by me, one who gives up all *dharmas* and one who would worship me is the best.  
” Śrīdhara Swāmī on BP 11.11.32 \(atra mad-bhaktyaiva sarvaṃ bhaviṣyati iti dṛḍha-niścayena eva dharmān santyajya yadvā bhakti-dārḍhyena nivṛttādhikārata yā santyajya iti\). Here it means that *dharma* is abandoned only with the firm conviction that by devotion to me everything will happen, or else \[*dharma* is abandoned\] because one’s eligibility \(to perform *karma*\) has disappeared due to one’s firmness in *bhakti* \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1b\). 
13.  BG 18.66 \(sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṃ śaraṇaṃ vraja …\) “Abandon all *dharma* and go to me alone, the ultimate refuge.”  
Śrīdhara Swāmī on BG 18.66 \(atra mad-bhaktyā eva sarvaṃ bhaviṣyati iti dṛḍha-viśvāsena vidhi-kaiṅkarya tyaktvā iti\) \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1b\). Here servitude to injunctions is abandoned by firm trust that by devotion to me everything will ­happen. 
14.  BP 1.5.17 \(tyaktvā sva-dharmam caraṇāmbujaṃ harer bhajann apakvo ‘tha patet tato yadi yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṃ ko vārtha āpto ‘bhajatāṃ sva-dharmataḥ\). Abandoning one’s own *dharma* while one is worshipping the lotus feet of Hari, if an immature \[person\], may fall from that then where would there be inauspiciousness of that person? What gain is obtained for those who do not worship the Lord though performing their own *dharma*?  
Śrīdhara Swāmī on BP 1.5.17 \(atra bhakti-rasikasya karmāṇadhikārāt iti vyākhyātaṃ\).Here it is explained due to absence of the authority of *karma* for those who are relishing devotion. \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1b\).  
15.  bhakti-dārḍhyenety asya bhakti-rasikasya iti asya ca prauḍha-śraddhāparaparyāya-dṛḍha-śraddhāyāṃ tātparyam \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1b\). 
16.  tatra kāmya-karmasu pravartamānasya sarvātmanā vidhi-pratiṣedhādhikāra ity uttarādhyāye vakṣyati, niṣkāma-karma-yogādhikāriṇas tu yathā-śakti sa ca jñāna-bhakti-yogādhikārāt prāk eva, tad adhikṛtayos tu svalpah, tābhyāṃ siddhānāṃ tu na kiṃcid iti \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1b and p. 2a\). 
17.  tatra vidhi-pratiṣedhau karma-kāṇḍoktau eva teṣām abhimatau \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 2a\). 
18.  tathā ekādaśe | nivṛttaṃ karma seveta pravṛttaṃ mat-paraḥ tyajet ity atra svāmi-vyākhyā ca | ataḥ pravṛttaṃ kāmyaṃ karma tyajet | nivṛttaṃ nitya-naimittikam eva kuryād. Thus, in the 11th \(Book\), \(BP 11.10.4\), one should perform *nivṛitti* acts, one who is dedicated to me should abandon *pravṛitti* acts, and in Sridhara Svāmī’s commentary \(on this verse\), it is recommended that one abandon *pravṛitti* acts, *kamya-karma* and only perform *nivṛitti* acts, *nitya-* and *naimittika-karma*. \(Monika Horstmann, p. 219\). 
19.  etad eva bhagavac-chrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya-mahā-prabhū-saṃpradāyācārya-śrī-sanātana-rūpa-jīva-gosvāminām api abhimataṃ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 3a\). 
20.  Based on Dimock; Stewart, *Caitanya caritāmṛta*, p. 877. 
21.  Gupta, *The Caitanya Vaisnava Vedanta*, p. 67. 
22.  uttamo madhyamaś ca syāt kaniṣṭhaś ceti sa tridhā | tatra uttamaḥ | śāstre yuktau ca nipuṇaḥ sarvathā dṛḍha-niścayaḥ | prauḍha-śraddho ‘dhikārī yaḥ sa bhaktāv uttamo mataḥ || atha tatra madhyamaḥ | yaḥ śāstrādiṣv anipuṇaḥ śraddhāvān sa tu madhyamaḥ | atha kaniṣṭhaḥ | yo bhavet komala-śraddhaḥ sa kaniṣṭho nigadyate \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 4a\). 
23.  atra madhyamasyāpi prauḍha-śraddhatvam asti iti jñāpitaṃ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 4b\). 
24.  evaṃ bhūto ya iti prauḍha-śraddha viśeṣaṇena prauḍha-śraddhāntarasūcanāt \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 4b\). 
25.  śraddhāvān manasi dṛḍha-niścaya evety arthaḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 4b\). 
26.  tathāpi tāratamyam tayo balavad-bādha-samādhāna-sāmarthyāsāmārthya kṛtam eva \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 5a\). 
27.  tasmād yad-avadhi śraddhāyāḥ kaumalyaṃ tad-avādhi kaniṣṭhatvaṃ kiñcit karmādhikāraś ca etādṛśa-lakṣaṇaka-kaniṣṭhādhikāriṇaḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 5a\). 
28.  ananuṣṭhānato doṣo bhakty-aṅgānāṃ prajāyate | na karmaṇām akaraṇād eṣa bhakty-adhikāriṇām || niṣiddhācārato daivāt prayaścittaṃ ca nocitam | iti vaiṣṇava-śāstrāṇāṃ rahasyaṃ tad-vidāṃ matam ||. A person eligible for *bhakti* is at fault for failing to execute the important limbs of *bhakti*. However, they are not at fault for failing to perform their *karma* \(prescribed duties of *varṇa* and *aśrama*\). If they, by destiny/chance, happen to engage in some forbidden activity, there is no atonement prescribed for them. This is the opinion of those who know the secret of the Vaiṣṇava scriptures. 
29.  atrāpi pūrṇa-śaraṇāpaty-ādi-lakṣaṇaiḥ prauḍha-śraddhatvam eva vyaktī-kṛtaṃ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 6a\). 
30.  bhakty-adhikāriṇām ity atra bahutva-nirdeśas tu prauḍha-śraddha-bhaktānāṃ māhātmyādhikyād ādareṇa vā teṣām eva \(Monika Horstmann, p. 267\). 
31.  Although the authorship of this work is contentious, some suggesting it was Gopal Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī; however, considering that the *Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya* refers to the author of the work as Sanatāna I do the same throughout this thesis. 
32.  A peculiarity that is worth a brief consideration is that rather than the term *komala-śraddhā*, “tender faith,” which we are familiar with as employed to describe the *kaniṣṭha bhakta*, or the lowest type of *bhakta* in Rūpa Gosvāmī’s BRS 1.2.16–19, instead here we observe that one possessing weak faith is described using the expression *mṛdu-śraddhā*, or “soft faith.” This is the chosen expression Sanatāna opts to use. One could therefore contend that according to BRS 1.2.63 the *kaniṣṭha* who possesses *komala-śraddhā* is also exempt from the practice of *karma* and it is rather the *mṛdu-śraddhā bhakta* who is bound by *karma*. In response to this contention, Kṛṣṇadeva states that *komala-śraddhā*, “tender faith,” and *mṛdu-śraddhā*, “soft faith,” are synonyms and argues that there is not any evidence that there is any difference between a person with tender faith \(*komala-śraddhā*\) and a person with soft faith \(*mṛdu-śraddhā*\). \[prauḍha-śraddhānām ity evārthaḥ saṃgacchate mṛdu-komalayoḥ paryāyatvāt, mṛdu-śraddha-komala-śraddhayor bhede pramāṇābhāvāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 265\)\] Therefore, Kṛṣṇadeva by equating *mṛdu-śraddhā* and *komala-śraddhā* dismisses the proposition that the *kaniṣṭha bhakta* transcends the authority of *karma*. Therefore, Rūpa, Jīva and Sanatāna are consistent in their conclusions regarding the lowest level of *bhaktas* and their obligation to *karma*. 
33.  tatra śrī-sanātana-gosvāminām yathā hari-bhakti-vilāse mṛdu-śraddhasya bhaktasya prauḍhatām anupeyuṣaḥ kiṃcit karmādhikāritvāt karmāsyaitat prapañcitaṃ prauḍha-śraddhasya bhaktasya karmasv anadhikārataḥ pātityam na bhavaty eva lekhanīyaṃ tad-agrata iti \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 3a\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 259\). 
34.  agratah bhakteh karmādhikāras nirasana-prakaraṇau, tatha karmādhikāra-nirasanastvam, tatra eva tāvat karmāṇi kurvatetyādi HBV \(11.553\) \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 3a\). 
35.  This also provides clarification to Sanatāna’s comments to BG 18.66 mentioned in the opening of the former chapter, consequently Sanatāna’s comments to BG 18.66 are only applicable for those who have reached the stage of mature faith. 
36.  tasmāt komala-śraddhasyādhikā-prāptatvāt tad-akaraṇe pratyavāyo bhavatīti tasyāvaśyakam eva nitya-naimityaka-karaṇam, prauḍha-śraddhasya tu nirapekṣasya karmānadhikārāt pratyavāyo na bhavaty eveti tam uddiśyaiva svarūpataḥ karma-parityāgo vihito ‘sti | sarvadharmān parityajyeti mad-bhakto vānapekṣaka ity ādinā \(Monika Horstmann, p. 260\). 
37.  tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta na nirvidyeta yāvatā mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā śraddhā yāvan na jāyate \(BP 11.20.27–28\). 
38.  Rembert Lutjeharms, “Śraddha in Caitanya Vaisnava Thought,” *ISKCON Studies Journal* 2 \(2014\), pp. 82–83, 97. 
39.  Lutjeharms, “Śraddha in Caitanya Vaisnava Thought,” p. 73. 
40.  kona bhāgye kona jīvera ‘śraddhā’ yadi haya tabe sei jīva ‘sādhu-saṅga’ ye karaya \(CC 2.23.5\) p. 707. 
41.  adau śraddhā tatha sadhu-sango … 
42.  śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya \(CC 2.22.37\), p. 691. 
43.  bhaktyaiva sarvam bhaviṣyati iti dṛḍha-niścayaḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 1a and p. 1b\). 
44.  yaḥ kenāpy atibhāgyena jāta-śraddho ‘sya sevane … \(BRS 1.2.14\). 
45.  ati-bhāgyena mahat-saṅgādi-jāta-saṃskāra-viśeṣeṇa \(Jīva’s and Visvanatha’s comments on BRS 1.2.14\) Based on Lutjeharms, “Śraddha in Caitanya Vaisnava Thought,” p. 105. 
46.  sādhu-saṅga haite haya ‘śravaṇa-kīrtana’ sādhana-bhaktye haya ‘sarvānartha-nivartana | anartha-nivṛtti haile bhaktye ‘niṣṭhā’ haya niṣṭhā haite śravaṇādye ‘ruci’ upajaya | ruci haite bhaktye haya ‘āsakti’ pracura āsakti haite citte janme kṛṣṇe prīty-aṅkura | sei ‘bhāva’ gāḍha haile dhare ‘prema’-nāma sei premā ‘prayojana’ sarvānanda-dhāma \(CC 2.23.6–9\), p. 707.  
Similar references were provided in works like the BRS 1.4.15–16: ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo ‘tha bhajana-kriyā tato ‘nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ. First there is faith, and after that association with holy men, and then the performance of worship, and as a result of that the sloughing off of evil things, and when that happens *niṣṭhā* comes about, and then appetite, and then attachment, and then *bhava*, and then *prema* arises. This is the order in which *prema* gradually appears in the *sādhakas*. \(CC 2.23. ślokas 5–6\), p. 707.  
47.  See Viśvanātha comments to BG 7.28 as presented in the last chapter. 
48.  jāta-śraddho mat-kathāsu nirviṇṇaḥ sarva-karmasu veda duḥkhātmakān kāmān parityāge ‘py anīśvaraḥ tato bhajeta māṁ prītaḥ śraddhālur dṛḍha-niścayaḥ juṣamāṇaś ca tān kāmān duḥkhodarkāṁś ca garhayan \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 269\). 
49.  The notion of antinomianism entails the belief that sect members only required faith for salvation and not obedience to moral laws. This would occasionally lead to society members neglecting rules determined by social norms, resulting in uncontrollable and unpredictable behaviour. 
50.  viṣṇu-dharme | maryādāṃ ca kṛtām tena yo bhinatti sa mānavaḥ | na viṣṇu-bhakto vijñeyaḥ sādhu-dharmārcano harir iti \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 271\). 
51.  yadā necchati pāpāni yadā puṇyāni vāṃchati | jñeyas tadā manuṣyeṇa hṛdi tasya hariḥ sthitaḥ iti viṣṇu-dharma-niyamena \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 272\). 
52.  para-patnī-para-dravya-para-hiṃsāsu yo matim | na karoti pumān bhūyaḥ toṣyate tena keśava iti viṣṇu-purāṇa-vākyādau \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 271\). 
53.  atraiva ca niṣkāma-karmaṇy api yady anyan na samācared iti vakṣyamāṇa-niṣedhāt | karma-parityāga-vidhānena sutarāṃ duḥkarma-parityāga-pratyāsatteḥ | \(Monika Horstmann, p. 271\). 
54.  atra kāmā apāpakarā eva jñeyāḥ | śāstre kathaṃcid api anyānuvidhānāyogāt | \(Monika Horstmann, p. 271\). 
55.  Furthermore, in the *Karma-vivṛti* according to Sridhara Svāmī’s comments on BP 11.10.4, \[tathā ekādaśe | nivṛttaṃ karma seveta pravṛttaṃ mat-paraḥ tyajet ity atra svāmi-vyākhyā ca | ataḥ pravṛttaṃ kāmyaṃ karma tyajet | nivṛttaṃ nitya-naimittikam eva kuryād\] \(Monika Horstmann, p. 221\), even for a novice Vaiṣṇava *bhakta* who has acquired weak faith, of the four types of *karma*, only *nitya* and *naimittika-karma* are prescribed which automatically prohibits engagement in *kāmya karmas* and acts which violate *dharma*. Consequently, it is safe to assume that for one who has succeeded in reaching an elevated stage of faith, namely firm faith who is categorised as a *madhyama* or *uttama bhakta*, they would certainly be expected to avoid violations of *dharma* especially in light of the stipulation that the inferior positioned *bhakta* is required to avoid even *kāmya karmas*. 
56.  Viśvanātha also offers clarifications on this verse. Viśvanātha’s comments in his *Sārtha-darṣiṇi* on the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa* shed further light upon BP 11.20.27–28, and he suggests herein that the “enjoyments” referred to in these verses are not those outside of scriptural injunctions. He gives the example of enjoyments in relation to a family man’s interaction with his wife and children, and the rising attachment to them that may occur in family dealings, which could be considered “mild violations” endorsed by scripture. 
57.  \(apavitraḥ\(apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṃ gato ‘pi vā\) | yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṃ sa bāhyābhyantara-śuciḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 7b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 274\). 
58.  ādau śraddadhānā api snānādikam ācaranti | tat khalu śrīman-nārada-vyāsādi-sat-paramparācāra-gauravād eva \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8a\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 274\). 
59.  anyathā tad-ati-krame ‘py aparādhaḥ syāt | te ca tathā maryādām lokasya kadarya-vṛttyādi-nirodhāyaiva sthāpitavanta iti jñeyam \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8a\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 275\). 
60.  api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag vyavasito hi saḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
61.  uktasyānanya-bhāktvena lakṣitā \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
62.  loka-paramparā-prāptā, na tu śāstrāvadhāraṇa-jātā \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p.8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
63.  ye śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ \(BG 17.1\) \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
64.  śāstrīya-śraddhāyām tu jātāyām sudurācāratvāyogaḥ syāt \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
65.  viṣṇu-toṣaṇa-śāstra-virodhāt \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
66.  Rembert Lutjeharms explains that Jīva considers one who has acquired faith through worldly or popular traditions or non-scriptural based faith to be the faith possessed by the Bhāgavata’s “materialistic devotee.” This faith is illustrated in BP 11.2.44–47, where the lowest category of *bhaktas*, the *kaniṣṭha bhakta* is described as a materialistic devotee, who worships the deity of Hari \(Kṛṣṇa\) with faith, however does not behave appropriately towards his devotees and others \(arcāyām eva haraye pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ\). In light of this understanding, the materialistic *bhakta* or *kaniṣṭha bhakta*’s faith is weak being born from worldly traditions instead of faith born from scriptural injunctions. This also indicates that faith should preferably be based on scripture, the knowledge presented in scriptures leads to strong faith that prevents one from transgressing scriptural injunctions. \(Lutjeharms, “Śraddha in Caitanya Vaisnava Thought,” pp. 93–94\). 
67.  Monika Horstmann, p. 276. 
68.  api-śabdena durācāratvasya heyatva-vyañjanāt \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
69.  tathā kṣipram bhavati dharmātmā ity-uttarāpratipatteḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 8b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
70.  nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhir na vidyate tasya yamair hi śuddhiḥ \(Monika Horstmann, p. 276\). 
71.  karmaṇaiva hi saṁsiddhim āsthitā janakādayaḥ loka-saṅgraham evāpi sampaśyan kartum arhasi. \(Indeed, simply by executing *karma* kings like Janaka and so on, were situated in perfection, and therefore you are obliged to perform action for holding the world together.\) 
72.  Catherine A. Robinson, *Interpretations of the Bhagavad-gīta and Images of the Hindu traditions* \(New York, 2006\), pp. 54–71. 
73.  tatrādau nirapekṣa-prauḍha-śraddhasya kevalam arcanam uktaṃ mṛdu-śraddha-loka-saṇgrahāpekṣa-prauḍha-śraddhayos tu karma-miśraṁ tad-uddiṣṭa agre tat-karma-karaṇa-vyavasthā-kathanena karma-miśratva-doṣa-nirasana dvārā tayoḥ śuddha-bhaktatam apy aṇgīkṛtam asti yathā \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 9b\). 
74.  tad etad-arcanam dvividham kevalam karma-miśram ca | tad etad-arcanam ­dvividham kevalam karma-miśram ca | tayoḥ pūrvaṃ nirapekṣāṇāṃ śraddhāvatāṃ darśitam āvirhotreṇa, ‘ya āśu hṛdaya-granthim…’ ity ādau | uktaṃ ca śrī-nāradena, ‘yadā yasyānugṛhṇāti bhagavān ātmabhāvitaḥ, sa jahāti matiṃ loke vede ca pariniṣṭhitām’ iti | atra śrīmad-agastya-saṃhitā ca ‘yathā vidhi-niṣedhau tu mukta naivopasarpataḥ, tathā na spṛśato rāmopāsaka vidhi-pūrvakam’ iti \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 9b\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 262\). 
75.  uttaraṃ vyavahāra-ceṣṭātiśayavattā yādṛcchikā-bhakty-anuṣṭhānavattādi-lakṣaṇa-lakṣita-śraddhānāṃ tathā vaiparītya-lakṣitā-śraddhānām api pratiṣṭhitānāṃ bhakti-vārttānabhijña-buddhiṣu sādhāraṇa-vaidika-karmānuṣṭhāna-lopo ‘pi mā ‘bhūd iti loka-saṅgraha-parāṇāṃ gṛhasthānāṃ darśitam \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 10a\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 262\). 
76.  śrī-nārada-pañcarātre caivam eva śrī-nārāyaṇa-vākyaṃ śrāddha-kathanāraṃbhe, nācared yas tu siddho ‘pi laukikaṃ dharmaṃ arthataḥ, upaplavāc ca dharmasya glānir bhavati nārada, vivekajñair ataḥ sarvair lokācāro yathā-sthitaḥ, ādehapātād yatnena rakṣaṇīyaḥ prayatnata iti \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 10a\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 262\). 
77.  sandhyopāstyādi-karmāṇi vedenācoditāni me pūjām taiḥ kalpayet samyak-sankalpaḥ karma-pāvanīm || ity ādi spaṣṭam \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 10b\). 
78.  sandhyopāstyādi karmmāṇi nitya-naimittikāni taiḥ karmmabhiḥ pūjāṃ samyak kalpayed iti | tasya tad-akaraṇe pratyavāyaḥ saṃbhavāt tena pūjāyā api asamyatkvaṃ syād iti bhāvaḥ | karmma-pāvanīm ity asya karma-karaṇe tu tan-miśratvaṃ na doṣāyetībhāvaḥ || \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 11a\). 
79.  vyavahārā-ceṣṭātiśayavattā yādṛcchika-bhakty-anuṣṭhānavattādi-lakṣaṇena lakṣitā āīṣat-śraddhā yeṣāṃ komala-śraddhānāṃ kaniṣṭhādhikāriṇām ity arthaḥ, vaiparītya-lakṣita-śraddhānāṃ vaiparītyena yādṛcchika-vyavahāra-ceṣṭāvattā-bhakty-anuṣṭhānātiśayavattā-rūpeṇa lakṣitā śraddhā yeṣāṃ teṣāṃ dṛḍha-śraddhānām ity arthaḥ, gṛhasthānām ity apalakṣaṇam, brahmacārī-vānaprastha-bhikṣūnām, eteṣāṃ pūrvoktānāṃ īṣac chraddha-loka-saṅgrāhaka-dṛḍha-śraddha-bhaktānām ity eṣa sandarbhārthaḥ \(Monika Horstmann, p. 264\). 
80.  yathā nārada-pañcarātre lakṣmī-saṃhitāyāṃ sapta-daśādhyāye, asyāṃ sthito jagannāthaṃ prapadyeta janārdanam, sakṛd eva hi śāstrārthaḥ kṛto ‘yaṃ tārayen naram, upāyāpāya-saṃyoge ‘niṣṭhayā hīyate’ nayā, apāya-saṃbhave caitat-prāyaścittaṃ samācaret, upāyānām upāyatva-svīkāre ‘py etad eva hi, aviplavāya dharmāṇāṃ pāvanāya kulasya ca, saṅgrahāya ca lokasya maryādā-sthāpanāya ca, priyāya mama viṣṇoś ca deva-devasya śārṅigaṇaḥ, manīṣī vaidikācāraṃ manasāpi na laṅghayet, yathā hi vallabho rājño nadīṃ rājñā pravarttitām, lokopayoginīṃ ramyāṃ bahusasya vivardhinīm laṅghayan śūlam ārohed anapekṣo ‘pi tāṃ prati, evaṃ vilaṃghayan ­martyo maryādāṃ veda-nirmitām, priyo ‘pi na priyo ‘sau me mad-ājñā-prativartanād iti \(Monika Horstmann, pp. 260–261\). 
81.  \(Monika\(Monika Horstmann, pp. 261–262\). 
82.  eteṣāṃ ca dvidhā karma-vyavasthā śrī-nārada-paṇcarātrādau, antaryāmi-śrī-bhagavad-dṛṣṭyaiva sarvārādhanam, vihitaṃ viṣṇu-yāmalādau tu, viṣṇu-pādodakenaiva pitṝṇāṃ tarpaṇa-kriyā, viṣṇor niveditānnena yaṣṭavyaṃ devatāṇtaram ityādi prakāreṇa vihitam itīti \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 11a\) \(Monika Horstmann, p. 263\). 
83.  atrāntarayāmi bhagavad-dṛṣṭyā tadīyatvena vā tat-prasādādīnā ‘nyārādhana hari-bhakti-vilāse ca vaiṣṇava-śraddhādikaṃ bhagavat-prasādānnādinā vihitam asti karmmadikam api na śuddha-bhakti virodhīti bodhayati, ata eva tādṛśa-kārmmaṇīti śuddha-bhaktyantaḥ pāto ‘ngīkṛtosti sat-sanga-mahima-prakaraṇe na rodhayatītyādi vyākhyāne \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 11a\). 
84.  tatrāgnihotrādīnām bhaktau praveśo ‘gny-antaryāmi-rūpa-bhagavad-adhiṣṭhānatvenāgny-ādi-saṃtārpaṇāt, kūpārāmādīnāṃ ca tat-paricaryārthāṃ kriyamāṇatvāt tatra praveśaḥ ity anena anyathā tatrety anenāpūrva-parāmarśa-svīkāreṇa prakrama-bhaṅgāpattiḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 11a and p. 11b\). 
85.  anena anyathā tatrety anenāpūrva-parāmarśa-svīkāreṇa prakrama-bhaṇgāpattiḥ ­bhaktau śuddha-bhaktāv ity arthaḥ, bhagavad-pāricaryārthām kriyamāṇa-kūpārāmādināṃ tad-arthākhila-ceṣṭītāṇtargatattvena śuddha-bhaktitva-svīkārāt bhakti-mātratvasyāropādināpi siddhāv antaryāmi-dṛṣṭi-vidhāna-paryantānusandhānānārthakyaṃ ca syāt । ata eva tādṛśa-karmma-miśratvādau saty api karma-miśratvādi nirasanam evāha \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 11b\). 
86.  atha vā bhagavad-rūpatvena bhagavadīyatvena bhagavad-adhiṣṭhānatvena vā devatāntarasya yajanasyāpi svarūpa-siddha-śuddha-bhakty-antaḥ pāta eva na tu karmatvaṃ sākṣād-bhagavad-ārādhana-rūpatvāt \(Monika Horstmann, p. 280\). 
87.  devatānāṃ bhagavad-abhedas tu bhāgavata eva sarva-rūpatvāt। tac ca। ekaḥ pṛthan-nāmabhir āhuto mudā gṛhṇāti pūrṇaḥ svayam āśiṣāṃ prabhuḥ । sa sarva-nāmā sa ca sarva-rūpaḥ vinācyutād vastutarāṃ na vācyam। Other gods are non-different from the Lord because the Lord is identical with all forms. And as stated in \(BP 5.19.26\) The complete Lord, the master of blessings is invoked by various names, he joyfully accepts \(the offerings\). In \(BP 6.4.28\) All the names belong to Him, and all the forms are His forms… One cannot name a substance which is not Lord Acyuta \(Monika Horstmann, p. 281\). 
88.  tac ca bhāgavatādau prasiddham eva bhakti-saṇdarbhaś ca śrī-brahma-śivāv api vaiṣṇavatvenaiva bhajeteti tato ‘nanya-bhaktāḥ śrī-śivam api vaiṣṇavatvenaiva mānayanti kecit, kadācit tad-adhiṣṭhānatvenaiva veti, tasmāt tadīyatvenopāsanāyāṃ kvacid rūpa-guṇo ‘pi bhavati, avajñādau tu doṣa iti, tasmād anyeṣāman anādaro na kartavyaḥ, tat-saṃbandhenādarādikaṃ ca kartavyaṃ svātantryeṇopāsanaṃ tu dhik-kṛtam \(Monika Horstmann, p. 283\). 
89.  atrāyaṃ kramaḥ || ādau karmaṇi pūrṇa-śraddhā, tatas tad-anuṣṭhānato bhakti-mātra-kāma-miśra-bhakta-saṅgādi-vaśād aṃśataḥ karmaṇi bhaktau ca miśra śraddhā, tatas tayā bhakti-mātra-kāma-miśra-bhakty-anuṣṭhānaṃ. \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 14a\). 
90.  ucyate bhakti-āvarakatvānāvarakatva-bhedena karmmaṇo vidyāt karma-miśratvam api dvidhaṃ bhavati, śuddha-bhaktitva-virodhi tad-avirodhi ca, tatra aṃśato ‘pi rājasa-śraddhāvihitaṃ karma bhakty-āvarakaṃ, bhakteḥ sākṣāt-premotpādane pratibandhakaṃ | tad-anyat tad-anāvarakaṃ tatrāvara-karmma-miśratvaṃ śuddha-bhakti-virodhi karmma-miśratva-vyavahāra-viṣayaś ca \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 12b and p. 13a\). 
91.  \(BS\(BS 225\) tatra karmma-miśrā tri-vidhā saṃbhavati sakāmā kaivalya-kāmā bhakti-mātra-kāmā ca \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 13a\). 
92.  tad evaṃ bhakti-mātra-kāmādhikāriṇo ‘py aṃśataḥ karmma-śraddhāpy upapāditā, tādṛśa-karmma-miśratvābhiprāyeṇaiva karmmāvṛtatvam āpadyeteti tarhi sāṇkarṣye kathaṃ śuddhe jñāna-bhaktī pravarteyātām ity āśankā pravṛttir upapattavyā, tataś cāntarāto ‘pi karmma-śraddhaiva bhakty-āvarikā na tu karmma, ata ‘evānyā-bhilāṣitā-śūnyam’ ity ādau jñāna-karmma-śūnyam ity anuktā jñāna-karmmādy-anāvṛtam ity evoktaṃ, tataś cāvaraka-jñāna-karmmādi-śūnyam ity arthaḥ \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 13b\). 
93.  The highest devotion is continuous and devoted service to Kṛṣṇa performed in a favourable way. It is free of all other desires and unobscured by knowledge or activity \(anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṃ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṃ bhaktir uttamā\). 
94.  tataḥ śuddha-bhakta-saṅgādi-vaśāc chuddha-bhakti-śraddhā, tatas tatra mṛdutve antaryāmidṛṣṭy-ādi-vihita-kiṃcit-karma-nitya-naimittika-rūpa-kiṃcit-karmānuṣṭhāna-sahita-bhakty-anuṣṭhānaṃ, tataḥ prauḍha-śraddhā tatra loka-saṅgrahāpekṣāyāṃ pūrva-rītyā yathāvāt-karmānuṣṭhāna-sahitaṃ bhakty-anuṣṭhānaṃ, tatas tatra nairapekṣe kevala-bhakty-anuṣṭhānaṃ, tato ‘cirād eva samyag-anartha-nirasty-ādi-dvārā-raty-ādy āvirbhāva iti śuddha-bhakty-adhikāri \(Karmādhikāra-nirṇaya, p. 17a\). 
95.  atrāyaṃ niṣkarṣaḥ, gṛhīta-viṣṇu-dīkṣākair viprādibhiḥ śuddha-bhakty-adhikārāt prāk samyak karmādhikāritvāt pratyavāya-parihārārthaṃ bhagavat-paritoṣaṇārthaṃ ca samyag eva karmānuṣṭheyam, tac cāropa-siddhā-rūpā-saṃga-siddhā-rūpaṃ vā \(Monika Horstmann, p. 279\). 
96.  tatrāpi śuddha-bhakti-kāmanayā na tv anya-kāmanayā, jātāyāṃ komala-śraddhā-rūpa-kaniṣṭhādhikāritāyāṃ tu kiṃcit karmādhikāritvāt tādṛśa-pratyavāya-parihārārthaṃ dāsa-buddhyā bhagavad-ājñā-paripālana-buddhyā vā nitya-naimittika-rūpam eva, tad-anuṣṭheyaṃ tad-arpaṇaṃ tu dāsa-bhāvenaiva kartavyam uktaṃ ca, hari-bhakti-vilāse, tataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-pādābje dāsyenaiva samarpayet, tribhir mantraiḥ sva-karmāṇi sarvāṇy ātmānam apy atheti \(Monika Horstmann, p. 279\). 
97.  jātāyāṃ prauḍha-śraddhā-rūpottama-madhyamādhikāritāyāṃ tu loka-saṅgrahārtham, tena bhagavat-prīty-arthaṃ ca antaryāmi-dṛṣṭyā bhagavad-ājñā-pālana-buddhyā ca yajñādikaṃ nitya-naimittikaṃ ca śrīmad-ambarīṣādivat, sarvam anuṣṭheyam \(Monika Horstmann, p. 280\). 
98.  According to the ninth book, fourth chapter of the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*, after committing an offense to Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, Durvāsa Muni, even though a great ascetic and *yogī* he was forced to travel all over the material and spiritual worlds within a year and personally went to see Viṣṇu for the protection of his life. However, Viṣṇu was unable to protect him because he had insulted King Ambarīṣa. Even though Ambarīṣa was a king, who engaged in various karmic rituals which he dedicated to the Lord, his position was shown to be more exalted than that of the renowned ascetic, Durvāsa. 
99.  evam evājāta-dṛḍha-rucinā vaidha-miśra-rāgānugādhikāriṇā jāta-dṛḍha-rucinā mukhya-rāgānugādhikāriṇāpi loka-saṅgrahārthaṃ samyag eva sarva-manuṣṭheyam, mukhya-rāgānugādhikāriṇā tu tatra loka-saṅgrahārtha-karma-karaṇasya sarva-sādhāraṇatvāt, svānugamyamāna-rāgātmaka-siddha-bhakta-sadācārānugati-dṛṣṭyeti viśeṣaḥ \(Monika Horstmann, p. 280\). 
100.  “The one desirous of attaining one of the emotional states of the Vrajaloka should do performative acts of service \(*sevā*\) in a manner which imitates the Vrajaloka with both the ‘perfected body’ \(*siddha-rūpa*\) and the ‘practitioner’s body’ \(*sādhaka-rūpa*\)” \(Haberman, *Acting as a Way of Salvation*, p. 96\). 
101.  Viśvanātha also contributed to this debate claiming that the literal imitation of the residents of Vṛndavāna is strictly confined to the mental sphere and not the public arena, and rather the external imitation should be that of Rūpa Gosvāmī and others like him who were perfected beings, engaging in *vaidhi-bhakti*. 
102.  Kṛṣṇadeva makes the distinction between one who has just taken Vaiṣṇava initiation and a *kaniṣṭha-bhakta*, in the opening of this passage \(Monika Horstmann, p. 279\). 


