+++
title = "09 The Middle-Floor Sanctum"

+++

***The Sculpted Program of the Southern Path***





The southern sequence of the middle-floor sanctum begins on the west, at the southwest corner of the porch facing south. It moves counterclockwise to the eastern side, ending with the panel adjacent to its central window. Figure 6.3 identifies its twelve panels \(13–24\). As in the case of the northern sequence, we shall discuss this sculpted program beginning with the western side \(panels 13–16\), moving directly to the eastern side \(panels 23–24\). The southern side \(panels 17–22\) will be discussed in chapter 10.



## **Western Panels of the Southern Path**

### ***Panel 13: The Murti Hrishikesha***

The southern sequence begins at the porch’s northwest corner with the tenth murti, named Hrishikesha \(Ruler of the Senses\), standing on a lotus, facing south \(Figure 9.1\). He has two pairs of arms. The back pair holds the conch in the left hand and the wheel in the right; the latter appears to be held with its rim facing the viewer in the position of a missile, prayogachakra. He rests his front left hand on his hip, and raises up his front forearm, but its hand has broken off; it perhaps formed the abhayamudra of protection implied by the wheel behind it. This panel introduces the theme of protection, raksha, by means of mantras used as arrows, astra, deployed in ritual performance or kriya.




FIGURE 9.1. Panel 13: The murti Hrishikesha \(prior to repair\). Photo by Hudson, 1990.




### ***Panel 14: Vamana the Dwarf at Bali’s Horse Sacrifice***

THE STORY. The second panel on the porch begins with four depictions of the story of Vishnu when he took the form of a dwarf, Vamana, to conquer the asura king Bali \(*BP* 8.15–23\). Bali’s name means “powerful” \(*balin*\) and “offering” \(*bali*\), and both meanings drive the plot of his story. Bali is the son of Virochana \(Illuminating\) and the grandson of Prahlada \(Delight\), whom we met in the story of Narasimha and Hiranyakashipu \(Panels 8 and 9 in chapter 8\). After churning the Milk Ocean, Indra and Bali fought over the amrita and Indra won. The injured Bali retreated to the western mountain, entered the dark waters beneath earth, and his acharya Shukra \(Resplendent or Venus\), the leader of the Bhrigu clan of Brahmins, healed him.

Bali’s asura nature is to conquer devas, and he wants Shukra and other Bhrigus to consecrate him into universal sovereignty \(*samraj*\). Under Shukra’s direction, Bali sponsors the All-Conquering \(*vishvajita*\) sacrifice, which requires him to give everything away. Out of its fire he receives a golden chariot yoked to horses with a flag bearing a lion emblem, an inexhaustible quiver, and a set of armor. Prahlada gives his grandson an unfading garland of flowers, and Shukra gives him a conch. Bali then receives the Great Unction \(*mahabhisheka*\), for he intends to usurp Indra’s throne eastward in Devadhani on the seventh continent Pushkara; this is where his grandfather Prahlada long ago watched Narasimha slay his father Hiranyakashipu on the mountain Boundary of the Mind. Bali arrives with his troops at Devadhani and blows Shukra’s conch to begin their attack.

Indra’s acharya is Brihaspati \(Master of Prayer or Jupiter\). He tells Indra that Shukra has had the Bhrigus impart their *brahman* nature to Bali and no one can defeat him except the Bhagavan. Indra flees Devadhani, and with his ten brothers takes refuge in the ashram of their parents, Kashyapa and Aditi. Bali occupies Devadhani. An asura of brahman nature is now the universal sovereign of the three worlds of death and birth. To secure this position he resolves to sponsor one hundred horse sacrifices. Shukra begins them and, like the moon, Bali’s tejas illuminates the world.

In the meantime, Aditi, daughter of Daksha \(Dexterous in Sacrifice\) asks her husband Kashyapa \(Black-teeth or Tortoise\) to restore their sons to Heaven. Kashyapa is a mind-born son of Brahma’s son Marici \(Light Ray\) and one of the Seven Rishis of this seventh Manu Term \(depicted opposite this panel by Panel 2\). Kashyapa tells her to seek refuge in the Supreme Person Janardana \(Who Agitates People\), the guru of the moving universe, the all-pervading Vasudeva dwelling in the secret place \(*guhavasam*\) of all living beings \(*BP* 8.16.20\). For this worship he teaches her the Milk Vow \(*payovrata*\), which his grandfather Brahma had taught; it is the essence of all sacrifices, of all vows, of austerity, and of ritual giving \(*BP* 8.16.24–57\). She is to observe it with Vasudeva in mind for thirteen days during the light half of Phalguna, the final month of the year, with the twelve-syllable mantra *Om namo bhagavate vasudevaya* \(*Om*, veneration to the blessed Vasudeva\). Aditi observes this Milk Vow and on the thirteenth day attains the unified consciousness called samadhi, which is focused on Vasudeva. He soon appears to her in a form with four arms holding the conch, wheel, and mace, and wearing a yellow cloth. A portion of Him will be born as her son, He tells her, and she is to imagine that this portion dwells within her husband. Kashyapa, who is also in samadhi, sees a portion of Hari enter him. When he emerges from samadhi he inseminates Aditi with the potent seed \(*virya*\) produced by his prolonged tapas. Then Brahma, known as Golden Embryo \(Hiranyagarbha\), praises her embryo with six secret names. The first of these is Prishnigarbha, which means Embryo of the Dappled One and Ray of Light \(*BP* 8.17.25–28\).1

The name Prishnigarbha has a tripartite secret \(*BP* 10.3.32–45\). Prishni first lived in the previous sarga of Svayambhuva with a master of progeny \(*prajapati*\) named Sutapa, and their duty was to propagate. She performed extrodinarily severe tapas focused on the Bhagavan for 12,000 deva years, and he appeared to her and granted a son. He then entered through Sutapa into Prishni’s womb as embryo \(*garbha*\) and was born as Prishnigarbha; this portion of Vasudeva is also known as Jayanta \(Victorious\). Prishni was born a second time as Aditi, and Sutapa was born as the master of progeny named Kashyapa. Jayanta Prishnigarbha was born to them again, this time as a Brahmin dwarf. Prishni was born for a third time as Devaki, and Sutapa was born as Vasudeva. Jayanta Prishnigarbha was born to them yet again, this time as Krishna. The secret meaning of the name Prishnibgarbha, therefore, is that he is the portion of Vasudeva \(*vasudeva-amsha*\) named Jayanta who appeared as two humans: first as a Brahmin and then as a Kshatriya. The one implies the other, but they are not equivalent, because the Brahmin Dwarf embodies a portion of Vasudeva while the Kshatriya Krishna embodies the whole of him.

About six months after the month of Phalguna, in the bright half of the month of Bhadrapada, on the twelfth day known as Victory \(*vijayadvadashi*\), during the eighth hour called Victorious \(*abhijit*\), Aditi gives birth to the twelfth and greatest of her sons. He has a dark blue form with four arms holding a conch, discus, lotus, and mace, and wears a yellow cloth. Once Aditi and Kashyapa have seen him, he changes like an actor into the guise of the Brahmin dwarf \(Vamana\) known as Younger-to-Indra or Upendra.

After his birth ceremonies Upendra is consecrated a celibate student \(*brahmacharin*\). The devas give Dwarf a sacred thread, a grass girdle, the skin of a black deer, a staff, a loin cloth, an umbrella, a water vessel, kusha grass, a string of beads, and a begging bowl. The Mother \(*uma*\), as Shiva’s faithful wife, gives him his first alms. Dwarf lights his first fire and for the first time offers the required ghee-dipped twigs as an oblation. When he learns that at this very moment Bali is performing a horse sacrifice on the northern bank of the Narmada River called Bhrigu’s Shore \(*bhrigukaccha*\), he decides to walk there for more alms \(*BP* 8.18\).

When this Brahmin Dwarf enters the sacrificial arena, his tejas immediately brings all to their feet. Bali receives Vamana hospitably and offers him whatever he wants. This pleases Vamana, who praises Bali and his asura lineage for their generosity and bravery. He mentions the difficulty Vishnu had when as Boar he conquered his ancestor Hiranyaksha, and he praises the greatness of Bali’s grandfather Prahlada.

Vamana also explains why Prahlada’s father, Hiranyakashipu, thought his son should worship him rather than Vishnu. After Vishnu had destroyed Hiranyaksha, the enraged Hiranyakashipu vowed to avenge his younger brother’s death. Vishnu realized that the asura would pursue him relentlessly and decided to hide in the asura’s own heart, for he knew Hiranyakashipu always looked outward to the objects of his senses and would never think to look inward. Vishnu made himself tiny, and Hiranyakashipu unknowingly inhaled him through his nose. Since Hiranyakashipu could not find Vishnu anywhere he concluded that he was dead, and that he, Hiranyakashipu, was now the only one to be worshiped.

Vamana also praises Bali’s father Virochana \(and this is the little we know of Virochana from the *Bhagavata Purana*\). Among Prahlada’s sons, he says, Virochana was wise and devoted to Brahmins. He gave his life to people dressed as Brahmins, even though he knew they were actually devas in disguise \(*BP* 8.19.14–15\). It pleases Vamana that Virochana’s son, Bali, follows the same dharma. \(Significantly, Vamana hints that Bali knows that he is Vishnu disguised, and will knowingly give him the three worlds of death and birth.\)

Vamana asks Bali for alms: a strip of land he can measure in three strides. Bali is surprised. Thinking that this small request is due to youthful inexperience, he urges Vamana to ask for more. But Vamana says that anyone not satisfied with three feet of ground will not be satisfied even with all nine regions of Jambu, and will want the other six continents too. He cites the examples of other rulers who always longed for more, beginning with the first king Prithu \(subject of Panel 17 discussed in chapter 10\). Freedom from rebirth comes from contentment with what one gets by chance, Vamana says; wealth brings happiness only if it is just enough to meet one’s needs. “With just three steps I shall fulfill all I have resolved to do.” Bali laughs. “Take as much as you want,” he says as he prepares to formalize the rite of giving his vowed gift called dana.

But Shukra issues a grave warning to his disciple: “This dwarf is the Bhagavan as Vishnu, and his feet will stride three times to fulfill your dana. In the first stride his foot will step across Earth, measuring all of her. In the second stride his foot will step upward, measuring all the Heavens. But in the third stride there will be no place left for the step of his foot, nothing left for it to measure. This failure of your vowed dana will lead you at death into purgatory \(*naraka*\).” He then tells his disciple how to handle his wealth as a world ruler:

You should not give dana that will jeopardize your own livelihood. The householder is obligated to divide wealth in five ways: between acts for religion \(*dharma*\), acts for fame, acts for economic gain, acts for pleasure, and acts for the benefit of one’s family. When you are true \(*satya*\) to the obligation of giving, you say “Yes” \(*om*\) to the request. When you are not true \(*anrita*\) to the obligation of giving, you say “No” \(*na*\) to the request. But to be true by saying, “Yes, I will give,” requires that one is also not-true by saying “No, I will not give away everything.” You cannot give away everything because you must fulfill the other four obligations as well as this one. You must therefore limit your dana and in this regard be “not-true” in order to give dana and be “true.” Being “untrue” by limiting dana preserves and increases wealth.

You have agreed to give three feet of land and if you now break this agreement you will indeed be “untrue.” But it is permitted to be “untrue” when it is a matter essential to the quality of life. There are seven such situations: when courting women, when joking, when arranging a marriage, when prosperity is at stake, when escaping death, when protecting a cow or a Brahmin, and when there is violence. \(*BP* 8.19.38–43\)

But Bali disagrees with his acharya.

How can I betray my word to a Brahmin, for as Goddess Earth said, “There is no greater unrighteousness than being untrue. I can bear anyone but a liar.” Nothing is more frightening to me than cheating or disappointing a Brahmin. Why give a partial gift to a Brahmin when you can give it all? After all, Dadhichi gave his body to devas to make Indra’s vajra from his bones, King Shibi gave his body to feed a hawk and save a dove, and many give their bodies on the battlefield. Yet when a tirtha worthy to receive gifts approaches, few people give with faith.2 Whether you offer this horse sacrifice to Vishnu or to an enemy, I shall give him the land he desires. Even if he were to tie me up, I would not harm him, for out of fear he dresses as a Brahmin. If he is truly Uttamashloka he will not want to give up his fame by killing me and seizing Earth through deceit, nor lie on the battlefield struck down by me. \(*BP* 8.20.4–13\)

“Soon you shall lose both wealth and fame,” Shukra responds in anger. Nevertheless, Bali pours water into Vamana’s right hand to confirm the gift. His wife Vindhyavali places a golden jar of consecrated water before him. Bali washes Vamana’s feet with the water and sprinkles the remainder on his own head. Flowers fall from Heaven, music resounds, and divine singers praise the great asura king Bali as he knowingly gives the three worlds to his enemy.

THE PANEL. Three standing figures with one pair of arms each face forward, intent on Vamana’s small figure slightly to the east of center \(Figure 9.2\). Bali, royally dressed and crowned, fills nearly half the panel on the west. With the anjalimudra of veneration he bends forward toward Vamana, and his crowned head marks the panel’s vertical axis. He bears his weight on his straight left leg and his left hip thrusts westward. Above and behind Bali’s right shoulder is the head and neck of a horse, the victim in the sacrifice. Directly above Bali’s head is the priest who will dismember the horse with a golden sword after it has been strangled; he kneels facing the horse, his left knee and foot on the ground, and with both hands holds the sword vertically in front of him as he bends his head of matted hair in veneration. This spatial arrangement identifies Bali, the patron of the sacrifice, with his animal substitute, the horse. The smaller Shukra, a Brahmin acharya whose hair appears to be piled on his head, stands to Bali’s left. He bends slightly to Vamana, but turns his face toward Bali as if explaining the mistake he is about to make. To emphasize his argument visually, Shukra raises his open right hand to the level of Bali’s face and with his left hand gestures toward Vamana.




FIGURE 9.2. Panel 14: Vamana the Dwarf at Bali’s horse sacrifice \(prior to repair\). Photo by Hudson, 1990.


Vamana the Dwarf stands in front of Sukra’s left leg, so short that his head reaches only to the acharya’s stomach. He faces forward as he stretches his right arm across Shukra’s right leg, but his hand at the level of Shukra’s knee is damaged. With his left hand he holds the umbrella pole at his large belly; it stretches up and across his left shoulder, with its open umbrella left of his head.

Behind Shukra on the panel’s eastern side stands the royal figure of Bali’s grandfather, Prahlada. He is close to Bali’s height, but less bulky. His left arm is broken off, but his visible left hand forms a mudra in front of his left breast that is difficult to read. Above Prahlada’s head is the head of a ram; he is the goat required for the five-day soma sacrifice of which this elaborate horse sacrifice is a part. His omentum is to be offered to Soma and Agni on the fourth day.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel represents the murti Shridhara, the Bearer of Majesty, the ninth interior formation. It also begins the story of Bali and Vamana, which continues with two panels on the sanctum, and ends below with Panel SP2 discussed in chapter 12.

Brahma’s praise of the embryo in Aditi’s womb with secret names introduces the secret connection of Vamana to Krishna. The first of these six secret names is Prishnigarbha, and we learn who he is from the story of Krishna’s birth \(*BP* 10.3.32–46\). God Vasudeva is born to Vasudeva and Devaki as dark-skinned, dressed in yellow, with four arms holding the wheel, conch, mace, and lotus. Before He changes shape to that of a human baby He explains to Devaki and Vasudeva that this is His third birth with the same shape and with the same parents \(see above\). In sum, Vamana and Krishna are directly linked, for both are Prishnigarbha reborn. Vamana implies Krishna, and Krishna implies Vamana.

The southern sequence makes this connection visually. The story of Bali and Vamana concludes at the southwest corner with Panel 16. Krishna appears at the southeast corner in Panel 23. As we know from the northern sequence, the corner panel of the sanctum’s western side continues with the corner panel of its eastern side. This means that the depiction of the murti Trivikrama as Narayana protecting Bali in Sutala leads directly to the depiction of Krishna slaying Kamsa. The connections between these two seemingly disparate episodes are explained by the panels between them, which face south and are discussed in chapter 10.

Finally, the story of Bali and Vamana is used as an analogy for the relationship of Nandivarman Pallavamalla to his acharya during a ceremony performed for the sake of his sovereignty \(*aishvarya*\). This ceremony takes place after Nandivarman received the consecration represented by the panels depicting Ashtabhujaswami and Krishna slaying Keshi of the northern sequence \(as discussed in chapters 6 and 7; the rituals are discussed in Appendix 2\).

This second ceremony is represented by the next two panels, which depict Trivikrama with eight arms and Narayana protecting Bali in Sutala. In this analogy, Bali represents Nandivarman and Vamana represents his acharya. We may distinguish five areas of correspondence:

1.Bali and Nandivarman share an analogous ritual status; asuras are analogous to Shudras, and Nandivarman is a Shudra king according to the *Laws of Manu*: He is a Malla and a Dravida, and both Mallas and Dravidas once were Kshatriyas, but now are Shudras \(*Manu* 10.23, 43–44\).

2.Bali has a brahmin nature imparted to him by the Bhrigus, and owns the whole world. Analogously, Nandivarman has been consecrated according to the rites of the northern sequence, and owns the entire Pallava realm.

3.Bali is devoted to Brahmins and to Vishnu. So is Nandivarman.

4.Bali knows that in the context of his sacrifice, Vishnu is disguised as Vamana. Nandivarman similarly knows that in the context of his sacrifice, Vishnu is disguised as his acharya.

5.Vishnu disguised as a Brahmin called Uttamashloka receives Bali’s promised gift—the entire world. Similarly, Vishnu “disguised” as the Brahmin acharya receives Nandivarman’s promised gift—the entire Pallava realm.

This analogy between Bali and Nandivarman, and between Vamana and the acharya, continues in the next two panels, Panels 15 and 16.



### ***Panel 15: Vamana the Dwarf as Trivikrama the Thrice-strider***

THE STORY. As soon as Bali pours water onto Vamana’s feet, the latter expands to reveal all of space-time and its inhabitants within his form \(*BP* 8.20–23\). With him are eight weapons \(wheel, bow, conch, mace, sword, scabbard or shield, and two quivers\); his attendants are led by Sunanda, the eldest of Brahma’s four sons known as Kumaras, which means “sons” and “princes,” and all the world protectors of the cardinal and intermediate directions. Vamana stands wearing a shining crown, armlets, fish-shaped earrings, the Shrivatsa on his chest, the Kaushtubha gem at his throat, a girdle, a yellow garment, and a fragrant garland of flowers. With his first stride he encompasses the whole of Earth’s realm, his body fills the sky, and his arms fill the directions. With his second stride he encompasses all of the space above. No room is left for his promised third stride, for his foot transverses the realms above Dhruvam and goes beyond the Tapas realm, above the Mahar and Jana realms, and into the highest realm of Satya, where Brahma and others go to receive it. To venerate Trivikrama’s foot, Brahma pours water from his pot over it, and this water becomes the Ganga flowing down to purify Heaven, Earth, and the underworld Rasa \(*BP* 8.21.1–4\).3

Suddenly Vamana resumes his small form standing on Bhrigu’s Shore. Brahma and others celebrate a great festival of joyous music filling the universe, but the asuras are furious at this deceitful strategy. The Bhagavan appeared as a celibate Brahmin student because it entitled him to alms, they say, and he appeared during this horse sacrifice because he knew its sponsor’s vow guaranteed that he would give alms, keep his word, and not be violent. The asuras attack the celebrants with spears and sharp-edged bars of metal, but Vishnu’s attendants laughingly begin to slay them until Bali, remembering Shukra’s words, “Soon you shall lose your wealth and glory,” orders his asuras to retreat. “In the past the Bhagavan favored us and now he favors them. Nothing can defeat Time. We shall wait until fate \(*daiva*\) turns in our favor.” His obedient asuras withdraw to the dark waters under Earth.

In the meantime the sacrificial goat escapes. Since the goat substitutes for the patron and is required to complete the ceremony, Garuda binds Bali with Varuna’s rope and ties him to the sacrificial post \(*yupa*\).4 This alarms everyone. Vamana now addresses Bali as the victim of his own sacrifice: “Where’s the place for the third stride you gave me? You can’t give what you promised, so you’ll go to purgatory. When you said ‘I give’ you were proud of your riches, but now you’ll feel what it means to lie.” Threatened with slaughter, Bali, who cannot move but can speak, appeals to Vamana:

O Uttamashloka Bhagavan, though you regard my promise as false, I am true to my word. Please place your third footstep on my head. Nothing frightens me more than an unrighteous teaching, and punishment by the most renowned of persons is the best of all; not even a mother, father, brother, or friend can give it. You are our supreme teacher in the guise of an enemy, for when you conquer us you reveal our blind asura pride and arrogance. Many receive success \(*siddhi*\) through a consciousness unified exclusively by deep hatred of you. You destroy us, yet my grandfather Prahlada found refuge at your feet. I am fortunate because wealth keeps people from facing death’s certainty, and you have taken mine away. And now fate \(*daiva*\) has brought me here to you. \(*BP* 8.22.2–11\)

As Shuka observes elsewhere, after Bali is bound with Varuna’s rope he is alone within himself, as if shut up in a mountain cave. There he reflects on the pettiness of Indra and Brihaspati, who use the Bhagavan to retrieve kingship and its wealth, which last only one Manu Term. In contrast, his grandfather Prahlada renounced such power and status in favor of service at Hari’s feet. Bali knows, however, that he cannot do the same without personal experience \(*anubhava*\) of the Bhagavan \(*BP* 5.24.23–26\).

Bali’s grandfather Prahlada now appears, brilliantly black and dressed in yellow. He approaches his grandson, who bows his head in veneration, and then prostrates at Vamana’s feet in the presence of Sunanda, Nanda, and the others. “You gave Bali the position of Indra and have taken it away,” he says, “all for his good because wealth is deluding, even for the learned. I venerate you as Lord of the Moving Universe, and as Narayana its Witness.” Bali’s wife Vindhyavali now bows down and addresses Indra’s younger brother: “You create these three worlds out of your own play, my Lord, yet others think they are the rulers. But what do they own that *they* can give to *you* who owns everything?” Then Brahma speaks to him, the God of Devas, Madhusudana, who made the moving universe and rules its beings: “Please release Bali, for without hesitation he gave you everything—all the worlds of Earth, and those attained through ritual acts—and his entire self. If a sincere person who washes your feet and worships them with mere durva grass attains the supreme goal, why should Bali suffer like this when he gave you not water and grass but all three worlds?” \(*BP* 8.22.12–23\).

In reply to Brahma, Vamana says:

I am gracious when I take away wealth. The atman embodied in the soul, jivatma, is impelled by intentional act \(*karma*\) and wanders through womb after womb until it somehow attains human birth. If it is then not prideful because of such things as lineage, achievements, youth, beauty, learning, authority, and prosperity, it is only because of my grace \(*madanugraha*\). Bali is such a person. He has conquered maya and is not deluded even in distress. When he was impoverished, expelled, fettered by his enemy, deserted by friends, and cursed by his guru, he did not swerve from his vow and kept to the truth. Even my distortion of dharma did not lead him from his word. He is completely resigned to me, and he shall become Indra in the next Manu Term, the eighth ruled by Savarni. In the meantime, he shall live with his grandfather Prahlada in the midst of Sutala, which Vishvakarma created.

And to Bali he says: “Go with your family and friends to Sutala envied even by those in Heaven. My wheel shall destroy anyone who attacks you and those with you, and you shall always perceive me there. My authority \(*madanubhava*\) shall keep you free of any taint from the asuras around you” \(*BP* 8.22.24–36\). Bali is astonished to hear the Infinite Ancient Person say this. “You are gracious to anyone who prostrates to you to become a devoted refugee \(*prapannabhakta*\). But you give me, an asura, your grace \(*anugraha*\) even before I can prostrate, bound as I am” \(*BP* 8.23.5\). Garuda releases Bali, who immediately prostrates to Hari and to the others, and then joyfully sets off for Sutala with his asuras. The Bhagavan has thus fulfilled Aditi’s request to restore her son Indra to his throne.

Bali’s grandfather Prahlada now addresses Vamana. “Never before has anyone—not Brahma, not Shri, not Shiva, nor any others—received this grace \(*prasada*\): that *you* will be the protector of the fort \(*durgapala*\). Brahma and other devas are mighty because of Approaching the Honey of the Lotus Feet \(*Padma-makaranda-nishevanena*\). But granter of refuge\! We are asuras of wicked ways and vile wombs—Why have you graciously brought us to the Path of the Southern Doctrine \(*Dakshinya-drishti-padavi*\)? Indeed, you are like the Wishing Tree, for you love devotees and give equally to any who ask.” “‘My dear Prahlada,” Vamana replies, “go to Sutala and be happy with your family. Every day, you shall see me there with mace in hand. The great delight you gain from this sight shall snap the bonds of your karma.” Prahlada and his family obediently set out to join Bali in Sutala \(*BP* 8.23.6–12\).

But Bali’s horse sacrifice remains incomplete. Hari Narayana turns to Shukra sitting among the priests of the *Brahman* Doctrine and tells him to do whatever is necessary to expiate this interruption. A Brahmin’s gaze is enough expiation, Shukra respectfully replies, and besides, the rites can hardly be flawed, because Bali gave everything to Hari Narayana. And if merely reciting Hari’s names will correct them, surely giving Him all of one’s possessions will do the same. But Shukra knows that carrying out the Bhagavan’s commands is the highest good, and completes the rites in the manner prescribed.

THE PANEL. This panel portrays Vamana’s response to Bali’s gift of three steps of land \(Figure 9.3\). He expands as the thrice-striding Trivikrama to divide the panel in half. He has four pairs of arms and hands, now damaged, and holds the same weapons as those held by Ashtabhujaswami, the Lord with Eight Arms, in the corresponding place on the sanctum north of the porch \(Panel 3 discussed in chapter 6\). But they are in a different order, with one substitution. From back to front and right to left are: 1\) the wheel \(missing\) and 2\) the conch \(at top of panel\); 3\) the sword \(damaged\) and 4\) the shield \(missing\); 5\) the arrow and the 6\) bow; and 7\) the mace and, instead of the lotus, 8\) the pointing hand.




FIGURE 9.3. Panel 15: Vamana the Dwarf as Trivikrama the Thrice-strider \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


Here Trivikrama has already measured out Earth with his first step and is taking the second to measure out the realms above. His left leg rises diagonally up toward the south corner of the panel, its foot level with the top of his head beneath his crown. Brahma in the upper worlds worships the foot, but one of Trivikrama’s left hands extends beyond it to point to the very top of spacetime as its final destination. The figure thus defines three destinations of rebirth: 1\) Vishnupadam, the pole star above Dhruvam, is at Trivikrama’s head, neck, and three left arms; 2\) Heaven and atmosphere beneath Dhruvam are in the middle at Trivikrama’s chest and four right arms; 3\) Earth and underworld Rasa are at Trivikrama’s right foot. Whoever attains Vishnupadam escapes samsara, the ever-moving cycle of death and birth that propels all beings dwelling beneath Dhruvam.

The startled figure leaping southward \(to the viewer’s right\), away from Vamana’s upraised leg, with hair flying out at the sides of his head, appears to be Bali’s grandfather, Prahlada.

North of Trivikrama \(to the viewer’s left\) is Garuda sitting on Bali, who is now the victim of his own horse sacrifice. Garuda, in a human shape with a beak-like nose, sits astride Bali’s back as if he were a goat, and Bali faces west, as the victim should. The goat required as a substitute for the sponsor of the sacrifice has fled, which means that Bali must now sacrifice himself literally. First the victim must be bound, so Garuda pulls Bali’s torso up in order to tie him up with Varuna’s rope. He holds the loop of a double-strand rope in his right hand and is about to tie up Bali’s right arm, which corresponds to the goat’s right front leg. If Bali were a goat, Garuda would then hook the rope to its right horn and tie it to the sacrificial pillar \(*yupa*\), which stands behind him, parallel to Trivikrama’s right leg. A three-strand rope of darbha grass near the pillar’s top hangs in a loop, mirroring the long garland looped around Trivikrama’s right thigh.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel represents the murti Vamana, the eighth interior formation. It also illustrates Vishnu’s deceit snaring asuras as night begins in the southwest corner of the temple mandala. Vishnu similarly appears as Mohini \(She Who Deludes\) at the southwest corner of the bottom floor \(Panel S6 discussed in chapter 15\).

The panel also appears to signify a second consecration of Nandivarman, one relating to his sovereignty \(*aishvarya*\)*:*

1.Its position on the sanctum and its eight-armed subject refer to Panel 3, which depicts Ashtabhujaswami. That panel refers in turn to the icon in the temple of Ashtabhujaswami or Attapuyakarattan, where Nandivarman began the consecration represented by panels of the northern sequence. This Trivikrama panel signifies the commencement of a similar but later consecration, perhaps in the same temple.

2.The first of these two consecrations manifests virya, and the second manifests aishvarya, the two properties of the Pre-eminently Mighty formation. The northern sequence ends with the “death” of Nandivarman as a seemingly autonomous Narendra or Indra of Men, immediately followed by his “birth” as a dependent Indra of Men, who rules with virya, with no results in mind other than the Bhagavan’s pleasure. The southern sequence ends with Nandivarman ruling with aishvarya, a sovereignty derived from the Bhagavan. The consciousness of the Pallava realm as “his,” and the consciousness of himself as “I” opposed to “You,” have been replaced by consciousness of Vasudeva Krishna as his sovereign, and the only true sovereign, owner and ruler all things.

Moreover, this panel implies that during this second consecration Nandivarman gave away his realm, gave up all his dharmas as ruler, and took refuge in Vishnu present in his acharya. We learn this from Bali’s two responses to Vamana using the title Uttamashloka. He first uses this title in his argument against Shukra: “If he truly is Uttamashloka he will not want to give up his fame by killing me and seizing Earth through deceit, nor lie on the battlefield struck down by me” \(*BP* 8.20.13\). Here Bali uses the title’s overt meaning, “He of Most Excellent Renown,” to refer to Vishnu as an enemy who will fight him honestly in a battle. But when Bali finds himself bound as a victim at Vamana’s feet he sees that he and Vishnu are not equal as warriors, and that Vishnu is *not* honest. This is when he uses the title the second time: “O Uttamashloka Bhagavan, though you regard my promise as false, I am true to my word. Please place your third footstep on my head” \(*BP* 8.22.2\). The converse of this statement is presumably also true, although Bali leaves it unstated: “O Uttamashloka Bhagavan, though I regard you as false, you are true to your word. Please place your third footstep on my head.” Which of Uttamashloka’s words does Bali have in mind?

The answer lies in the secret discussed earlier—that Vamana and Krishna are each Prishnigarbha reborn. What Vamana says applies to Krishna, and what Krishna says applies to Vamana. This means that Bali has in mind Krishna’s famous statement to Arjuna in *Bhagavad-gita* 18.66: “Give up all dharmas and turn to me as your only refuge. I shall free you from all sins, have no care.” There are two components of this statement; Panel 15 illustrates the first component: “Give up all dharmas and turn to me as your only refuge.” Panel 16 illustrates the second component: “I shall free you from all sins, have no care.”

The first component of Krishna’s promise consists of two parts: “Give up all dharmas,” and “turn to me as your only refuge.” Events depicted at the bottom of the panel illustrate both. “Give up all dharmas”: The dharmas Bali is required to give up are the rites of the horse sacrifice. But he has already given them up by virtue of Garuda tying him with Varuna’s ropes to be the victim replacing the goat that has escaped—an irony, because the goat was meant to replace Bali. Literally, there is no dharma or ritual act that Bali can perform. Moreover, tied up at the sacrificial post near Vamana’s feet, Bali’s body is already turned toward him as his only possible refuge. Everything Krishna requires as voluntary acts has been done for Bali involuntarily; his freedom is entirely mental, to turn to Vamana as his only refuge. In this manner the bottom of panel 15 illustrates the first component of Krishna’s famous promise. We will discuss the second component, “I shall free you from all sins, have no care,” below with Panel 16.

This distinction between the two components of Krishna’s promise is recognized by Bhagavata theology. The first component is known as “supreme” \(*uttama*\) and the second is known as “great” \(*brihat*\) \(Vedanta Deshika 1956: 18–19\). The “supreme” component produces the “great” component in the way a father produces a son. Not surprisingly, Vamana’s family illustrates this idea. Sometime after Bali’s sacrifice, Vamana marries a wife named Kirti \(Glory\). They have a son named Brihacchloka \(Brihadshloka\) \(*BP* 6.18.8\). Overtly their son’s name means “He of Great Renown.” Covertly it means “He of the Great Stanza.” Vamana and his son thus represent the two components of Krishna’s great promise: Vamana as Uttamashloka the father represents the first and “supreme” \(*uttama*\) statement, “Give up all dharmas and turn to me as your only refuge.” Brihacchloka as his son born of Glory represents the derivative “great” \(*brihat*\) statement, “I shall free you from all sins, have no care.”

Another meaning of this episode points to the mandate that, even though the Shudra king \(represented by Bali\) has given everything away to the Bhagavan through the acharya \(represented by Vamana\), prescribed sacrifices must be performed and completed. This is not because the sponsoring king seeks their fruits but because they are the means by which the Bhagavan turns the wheel of action in the world. As Krishna explains to Arjuna, the Master of Progeny emits his progeny together with sacrifices they are to perform, and these sacrifices sustain devas; in return devas sustain the progeny with food. The Bhagavan thus acts continuously to sustain the universe and His progeny in it, and His progeny are to imitate Him by continuously performing the acts assigned to them. All are to match their “turning” to the turning of this wheel of action He sets in motion—which includes any asura, Shudra, or barbarian \(*mleccha*\) who has received the Bhrigus’ brahman nature through diksha \(*BG* 3.10–26\).

Tirumangai captures the two panels illustrating the story of Vamana’s conquest of Bali \(Panels 14 and 15\) in stanza seven of his poem about the temple. In the first half of the stanza he reports Nandivarman’s consecration to sovereignty by means of the story of Bali and Vamana; in the second half he reports its sovereign results. “One day, when Great Bali / Of the tall glittering crown / Sponsored a great sacrifice, / He took the shape of Dwarf, / And when water poured out / To seal the gift / He swindled him / Of this vast world—/ His place is Kacchi blazing in all / Directions with Agni’s flaming mouths, // There in the Vishnu-house / The Emperor built / After he proclaimed victory / For his many troops / And shook the King of the South / who rules the world, / And Karur of the Virgin’s / Tall rampart wall” \(*PT* 2.9.7\). Nandivarman’s consecration, Tirumangai says, frightened the Pandyan of Madurai named Maravarman Rajasimha \(730–765 CE\), and the Cheran ruler of Karur aligned with him. Tirumangai continues this pattern in stanzas eight and nine, which capture the meanings of the next panel.



### ***Panel 16: Narayana Protects Bali from Ravana***

THE STORY. Ravana, the king of rakshasas who has ten heads, is roaming around the world seeing to conquer it. When he comes to the gate of Bali’s Sutala he finds “Narayana, the Guru of the Entire Moving Universe,” sitting there with mace in hand as protector of the fort \(*durgapala*\). But before Ravana can even challenge Bali, Narayana flicks his toe, and this rakshasa king of ten necks and heads flies thousands of miles away \(*BP* 5.24.27\).

THE PANEL. This damaged panel captures the moment just before the Narayana flicks his toe. It divides vertically into halves \(Figure 9.4\). In the northern half \(to the viewer’s left\) Narayana sits on a throne, whose lower part is obliterated. His left leg is pendent and his damaged right leg is tucked up on the throne in the posture of royal ease. Narayana has four faces, gazing in the cardinal directions as if to illustrate his identity as “Guru of the Entire Moving Universe.” His three visible faces are each crowned;5 the front face looks westward, and perhaps tilts slightly down toward the south.




FIGURE 9.4. Panel 16: Narayana protects Bali from Ravana \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


This large and damaged figure, with four faces and Ravana at its feet, has been identified variously. The *Encyclopedia of Indian Temple Architecture* \(1983\) identifies it as “Ravana Taking away Kailasa” \(*Kailasaharana*\), which means the four-face figure is Shiva \(*EITA* 1.1: 72, table 9\). In contrast, the recent restorers of this Vishnu-house appear to have identified the four-face figure as Brahma. Brahma with four faces does appear in the temple, of course. He appears this way in the three sculpted scenes of Vasudeva’s vyuha formations on the sanctum below. And he appears this way in the second of two adjacent panels on the top register of the prakara’s western wall. The first panel of the latter depicts the unmanifest Narayana Vasudeva as the origin of Brahma. The panel to His left depicts Brahma with four faces as the source of the brahmanda \(Figure 9.5\).




FIGURE 9.5. Brahma with four faces \(prakara western wall, top register, second panel\). Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Three of Brahma’s four faces are visible in this depiction, each with a crown, above which there appears to extend tall matted hair, or perhaps the crown’s top. He has two pairs of arms. His back right hand appears to form a fist, with the palm facing the viewer, and it may hold something, perhaps the circular garland of beads used for mantra recitation \(*japamala*\). His back left hand, with palm facing the viewer, appears to form the jnanamudra of the left hand: the little finger stands up straight, the other fingers curl into the palm, and the thumb bends over the index finger \(*PS* 1974: 73\). This hand also appears to hold something that extends down from both sides, hidden, perhaps, behind Brahma’s arm. His front right hand forms the abhayamudra, and his front left hand rests in his lap, palm up, as if holding a book. The book is the four Vedas, which serve as Brahma’s “eyes” as he emanates his Daytime of Boar. Brahma’s two left hands thus identify him as the teacher of the Vedas, whose mantras embody jnana knowledge.

This depiction of Brahma with four faces shares features with the depiction of Narayana with four faces in Panel 16, to which we return. Narayana, like Brahma, has two pairs of arms and three visible faces. He likewise sits in the royal posture of ease. But his damaged wheel, normally held by his back right hand, appears to have been restored to suggest Brahma’s garland of prayer beads held on top of the hand. The damaged conch, normally held by his back left hand, is now only suggestive: it may be a conch on top of the hand, or a diminutive version of the water pot Brahma usually holds in the same hand.6 His front pair of arms, however, reveals that this four-face figure is Narayana protecting Bali in Sutala, as the story tells us. While his left hand rests on his left thigh, his front right hand forms a mudra: the middle finger, the ring finger, and the little finger grasp the thumb, and the tip of the index finger touches the thumb’s knuckle. No equivalent to this mudra appears in the *Padma-samhita* \(as they are illustrated in *PS* 1974\). But it does correspond to the vajramudra, which is fundamental to Buddhist Vajrayana \(Saunders 1985: 17–27; 38–39, fig. 2\).

Vajrayana \(also known as Esoteric Buddhism\) is believed to have begun in south India with a secret teaching given by Vairochana to the sage Vajrasattva. Evidence from the Tamil *Manimekalai* suggests that by the fifth century the Kanchipuram court patronized it; and the Pallava king Mahendravarman uses the royal Buddhist vihara and one of its Shakyabhikshu residents in the plot of his Sanskrit farce, the *Mattavilasa Prahasana* of ca. 600. A few decades later, in Mamallapuram, appears the first known inscription listing the ten avataras of Vishnu, and one of them—the ninth—is the Buddha. This inscription is above the shrine for Goddess Durga in what is now called the Adivaraha Cave-temple, a temple created in the seventh century, according to the Pancharatra Agama. The appearance of the Buddha in this southern corner of shakti and tejas is explained by Akrura in his prayer discussed at Panel 12 in chapter 6: “Veneration to Buddha the Pure, who deludes Daityas and Danavas” \(*BP* 10.40.22\). At the beginning of the Kali Yuga, the Bhagavan appears as the bhikshu known as the Shakyamuni Buddha in order to deceive asuras—which includes men and women who are bhikshus and bhikshunis \(as discussed at Panel 17 in chapter 10\). Yet Vishnu as the Buddha remains pure even as he appears in this deceiving bhikshu guise. This “Bhagavata Buddha” points to the presence in the Kanchipuram court of Buddhists, especially of the Vajrayana \(further discussion of Buddhists in Kanchipuram appears in chapter 15\). And it explains the appearance of the vajramudra in this southwest corner of deceit: the diamond-hard vajra of Narayana abiding as protector of the fort cuts through all “asura” delusion.

The southern half of Panel 16 is filled by a vertical sequence of three figures. Ravana sits at the bottom. He is oriented toward the north, but looks directly west with one of his three visible heads. His posture rudely mimics Narayana’s, with his right leg bent under his extended left leg, its foot emerging into view under his raised left knee. His left leg does not hang down, but extends toward the north, indicating that he is flying, or is sitting on the ground. In contrast to Narayana’s four heads fused into one, Ravana’s ten heads are differentiated. The three that are visible imply two others that cannot be seen, and these five represent all ten, matched by his ten pairs of arms, which are visible.7 The front pair of arms is the largest. The front left hand rests on the left hip and thigh. The front right elbow rests on the right knee, but the mudra formed by the right hand is not clear due to damage.

Directly above and to Narayana’s left sits the acharya Shukra, a small figure with piled-up hair. A doorway framing him suggests that he is enthroned in an open hall \(*mandapa*\). Above the roof of this hall, at the level of Narayana’s head, is Bali wearing a crown, leaping up in alarm from his throne. His right leg bends at the knee and points to the north, mirrored by his right arm, whose open hand bends backward to direct the viewer to the space above Narayana’s head. His left arm extends outward to the south and disappears in the badly damaged corner. Evidence of a figure sitting there suggests Bali’s queen, Vindhyavali.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel represents the murti Trivikrama. It also represents the great \(*brihat*\) promise following from the supreme \(*uttama*\) statement of the previous panel: “I will free you from all sin, have no care.” Narayana as the protector of fortified Sutala kicks Ravana far away from Bali—this fulfills Vamana’s promise to Bali: “Go with your family and friends to Sutala envied even by those in Heaven. My wheel shall destroy anyone who attacks you and those with you, and you shall always perceive me there. My authority shall keep you free of any taint from the asuras around you.” Moreover, the vajramudra formed by guru Narayana’s right hand signifies the end of asura delusion due to his abiding presence as protector of the fort.

The asura Bali in this panel, as in the previous two depicting this story of Dwarf, represents Nandivarman. He is a Malla who rules Dravidas, and Veda judges both Mallas and Dravidas to be Shudras who once were Kshatriyas.8 Dwarf represents Nandivarman’s acharya, a master of prayoga rites prescribed by the Pancharatra Agama for protection. Ruler and acharya similarly appear below in the sculpted scene on the prakara wall that depicts Nandivarman enthroned as Bhagavata emperor on one side and his acharya enthroned in a mandapa on the other. That panel faces east toward this one, and this one faces west toward that one, both in the southwest corner. Nandivarman on the prakara wall is enthroned with his queen, just as is Bali on the sanctum \(although her image is almost obliterated by damage\). Nandivarman’s acharya sits on the prakara in a mandapa, just as Bali’s acharya does here, and both mandapas stand to the left of God’s body. The body on the prakara is the model of the newly built Emperor’s Vishnu-house, on the sanctum it is Trivikrama with four faces.

The two share a connection to Ravana. Nandivarman sits enthroned on the prakara because his general, Udayacandra, won seven decisive battles.9 According to the eighth stanza of Kalikanri’s poem about this Vishnu-house, the crucial battle at Nenmeli frightened the Chera king the way Rama frightened Ravana when he crossed the sea to Lanka. Here on the sanctum Bali enthroned in Sutala is alarmed at Ravana’s appearance before Trivikrama flicks him away with his toe.

This panel also represents the conclusion of Nandivarman’s second consecration. Guru Narayana with four faces about to kick away Ravana represents the acharya in Nandivarman’s court who protects him through rites; the startled Bali leaping up from his throne represents the protected Nandivarman.

Tirumangai similarly represents Nandivarman’s protecting acharya in stanzas eight and nine of his poem. He appears in the first half of each stanza, and the result of his presence at court appears in the second half. Rama represents the acharya in stanza eight, as discussed at Panel 6 in chapter 7. Here the result of his presence is a frightened Chera ruler at a place called Nenmeli: “Once a King of vigor / With the Umbrella of a hero / And an army of monkeys / Blocked the sea with mountains—/ He is my Father the Lord / Whose place in beautiful Kacchi / Encircled by ornate halls // Is the Emperor’s Vishnu-house / Served by the Sovereign of Pallavas / who seized the Spear of War / in his right hand / and with the power of an army / frightened in Nenmeli / the virile Villavan bull, / the Cheran who owns the Bow” \(*PT* 2.9.8\). Nandivarman’s Spear of War frightened the opposing Cheran in the way Rama’s arrow frightened the opposing Ocean. Moreover, the Cheran implies Nandivarman’s greater opponent, the Pandyan of Madurai, just as Ocean implies Rama’s greater opponent, Ravana of Lanka. The fact that both Ravana and Maravarman Rajasimha were devoted to Shiva strengthens Tirumangai’s analogy.

Nandivarman’s protecting acharya appears in stanza nine as the cowherd Krishna. Tirumangai refers to an episode in the Krishna Story that is not in the *Bhagavata Purana*, but is well known to Tamil Bhagavatas: Krishna conquered Lust \(*Mal*\) disguised as seven bulls, and this conquest won him his cross-cousin Pinnai as his bride. The consequence of the acharya’s protection is Nandivarman’s unrivaled status as the Sovereign of Pallavas: “Pinnai’s forehead is a / Gleaming crescent moon / And she’s a cousin, /So long ago in battle / He subdued deceiving Lust / In the shape of seven bulls, / And now owns beautiful Kacchi / With its surrounding wealth, // Where the Sovereign of Pallavas / Serves the Vishnu-house he built, / after he conquered those / angry kings of swords / stained black from blood / As the Emperor who owns / The Drum with a bitter mouth / And the Conch with the roar of the sea” \(*PT* 2.9.9\).

The sculpted prakara panels that depict the historical events Tirumangai refers to in this poem have not been identified so far, with two exceptions. The first is the depiction of Pallavamalla’s unction as Kanchipuram’s Indra of Men with the title Nandivarman \(see Figure 4.3\). The second is Nandivarman’s later rule as the Bhagavata Sovereign of Pallavas \(see Figure 4.4\). This second set of prakara panels appears at the southwest corner of the temple mandala. This sequence faces the panels depicting the story of Bali and Vamana on the middle floor sanctum. The Bali and Vamana sequence faces west, and this prakara sequence faces east. On the temple mandala these facing sequences are in the southwest corner of disintegration, where night and the Kali Yuga begin and asura powers increase. Tirumangai appears to have had these correlated sequences in mind in the ninth stanza, for he places the sanctum panels facing west in its first half, and the prakara panels facing east in its second half.

Aditi’s role in the story of Dwarf and Bali concluded here points ahead to the panel illustrating Yudhishthira’s rajasuya, which ends this Path of the Southern Doctrine \(Panel 24\). Aditi in the rajasuya is two complementary modes of Goddess Earth.10 She is Disorder \(*nirriti*\) and Goodwill \(*anumati*\). On the mandala, Goodwill is located in the northeast, where the human and deva realms meet at the junction of sky and earth. Disorder is located in the southwest, where the ancestors and asuras meet at the junction of the underworld and earth. Disorder must be satisfied before Goodwill can benefit the rajasuya sponsor.11

In the birth metaphor governing the rajasuya, Disorder as the female Nirriti represents the cover of the embryo; it is constituted of sin \(*papman*\), phlegm, amnion, and chorion. A priest removes these covers from the patron, offers them to Nirriti in the southwest, and disposes of them as the concluding gift \(*dakshina*\) of a black garment with a black fringe. He then asks Nirriti to free the patron from anxiety or distress. This allows Goodwill as the female Anumati to open a way upward at the northeast for the patron, now born a Master of Progeny \(*prajapati*\). Aditi’s inauguration of her Milk Vow contains other allusions to the rajasuya: in the soil dug up from the ground, in the Bhagavan as Boar, and in the Goddess Earth.

This brings us to the last two panels of the southern sequence, which are on the sanctum’s eastern wall.



## **Eastern Panels of the Southern Path**

### ***Panel 23: Krishna Leaps up to Slay Kamsa***

This panel follows directly from southern sequence Panel 15, but the episode it illustrates continues directly from northern sequence Panel 12 on this same eastern side.

THE STORY. After Krishna has slain the wrestler Chanura, the gopas dance with Krishna and Balarama in the wrestling arena until Kamsa, king of Bhojas, orders the music to stop. “Throw these sons of Vasudeva out of the city,” he commands, “seize their wealth, tie up Nanda, kill Vasudeva and my father Ugrasena too, for he has sided with my enemy.” This infuriates Krishna, and with ease he leaps up to Kamsa’s high seat. Kamsa, sword in hand, tries to resist, but Krishna seizes his hair, throws him down onto the arena floor, and jumps on him. He then drags Kamsa’s corpse around the arena, to the astonishment of all. But Kamsa, out of fear, has had the Ruler in mind at all times—while he drank, ate, moved about, slept or breathed—and he achieves a very difficult goal: he now has the shape of the Bhagavan holding the wheel \(*BP* 10.44.31–39\).

Kamsa’s eight brothers attack, but Balarama clubs them to death, and devas scatter flowers and dance. The women of the dead come forward, embrace the bodies of their heroes, and lament: “Krishna is the origin, the end, and the protector of all beings, and well-being comes to no one who spurns him.” The Bhagavan, creator of the world, consoles the women and arranges for the funeral rites \(*BP* 10.44.40–48\).

Krishna and Balarama release their parents, Vasudeva and Devaki, from prison. Krishna welcomes back all his relatives who had fled from Kamsa, and installs his maternal grandfather Ugrasena on the Mathura throne. Krishna establishes these members of the Yadu, Vrishni, Andhaka, Madhu, Dasharha, Kukura, and other clans in their own homes with wealth. Krishna and Balarama then speak to Nanda with the affection of sons, promising to visit him in Gokula, and send him off laden with gifts. The brothers’ lives as cowherds are now over \(*BP* 10.44.50–51; 45.1–25\).

Vasudeva has Purodhasa and Brahmins perform the sacrament of the second birth for his two Kshatriya sons. After this Garga, the acharya of the Yadu clan, consecrates them to the Gayatri vow, and they keep its required celibacy. By behaving this way as men they hide their omniscient knowledge as Rulers of the Moving Universe. They are now to live and study with a guru, so they go to Avantipura, where Sandipani of Kashi dwells. In sixty-four days and nights they learn everything he has to teach. It is time for them to complete their discipleship by giving their guru a ritual gift \(*gurudakshina*\), and Sandipani asks them to bring back his son, who had died in the sea at Prabhasa on the western shore. Krishna and Balarama agree and set out in their chariot for Prabhasa, where they encounter Ocean \(Sindhu\). He assures them that he did not kill the boy; rather, he was killed by the asura Panchajanya, who travels the sea in the shape of a conch. Krishna immediately enters the sea, finds the asura, and slays him. But the guru’s son is nowhere to be found. He returns to his chariot with the conch shell that had been the asura’s body, and with Balarama, whose weapon is a plough, sets out southward for Yama’s city of Samyamani on the mountain Boundary of the Mind. They reach the city, Krishna blows the conch Panchajanya, and Yama appears immediately. “O Vishnu at play as human youths, what may I do for You?” he asks. Krishna replies, “Our guru’s son, whose karma has bound him, has been brought here to you. Nevertheless, Great King, I command you to release him.” Yama complies immediately, and Krishna and Balarama bring Sandipani his son. Their guru refuses a second gift, releasing the brothers to return to Mathura and to their roles as Kshatriya heroes \(*BP* 10.45.26–50\).

THE PANEL. The panel depicts the moment Krishna leaps up to Kamsa and grasps his hair \(Figure 9.6\). The viewer is in the place of Akrura. Kamsa’s seat above the arena floor divides the panel into two parts horizontally. In the upper part, Krishna with two arms and a tall crown floats lightly in the air; his crowned head breaks through the panel’s frame above to express his buoyancy and sovereignty. He faces eastward and gazes toward the viewer, while his right hand grasps the top of Kamsa’s hair. Krishna’s left arm stretches northward and bends down at the elbow with his hand near his waist; his left hand may form a mudra that is not discernable. His legs capture his leap: the left leg stretches downward to the north as the right leg rises up and bends at the knee.




FIGURE 9.6. Panel 23: Krishna leaps up to slay Kamsa. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Kamsa sits to the south in a state of collapse, his deflated torso contrasting with Krishna’s buoyancy. His left leg hangs down from his seat, his right leg rests on it, and he leans on his right arm. His left forearm bends upward and his hand may hold a weapon, but the damage is too great to be sure. His head faces eastward and tilts slightly northward as Krishna pulls the top of his long and tied hair. Kamsa’s left leg dangles into the lower half of the panel, and Balarama’s head rises into its upper half—a visual arrangement indicating that the events depicted in the two parts are simultaneous.

As Krishna leaps up to slay Kamsa in the panel’s upper part, Balarama continues to dance with the gopas in the lower part \(Figure 9.7\). Balarama is crowned, has two arms, and faces eastward as he looks down and southward; his eyes appear to gaze beyond his graceful right arm and open hand, whose thumb curls inward and palm faces the floor. His left arm has broken off above the elbow. The triangle of his legs and feet express his dance: he bends his thighs outward, points his knees north and south, crosses his ankles, and touches the floor with his toes. Balarama’s right hand and southward gaze lead the viewer’s eyes to a rectangular structure under Kamsa’s seat. A man wearing a crown or turban sits inside it with legs crossed. The mudra his right hand forms may be the mushtimudra of Krishna’s right hand in Panel 11, or the balimudra, for they have the same shape. His raised left hand, with fingers spread, suggests startled expectation. Most likely this man is Vasudeva, father of Balarama and Krishna, whom Kamsa had shackled with Devaki before he sent Keshi to slay Krishna \(*BP* 10.38.19–20\). His position under Kamsa’s throne illustrates Vasudeva’s imprisonment by the king of Bhojas. But his left hand gesturing upward to Krishna’s right hand grasping Kamsa’s hair points to his imminent emancipation by his son.




FIGURE 9.7. Balarama dances; Vasudeva sits imprisoned \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel depicting Kamsa’s death represents the end of Krishna and Balarama’s career as cowherds, their future study with their guru Sandipani, and their future as Kshatriyas. It also represents the brothers’ subsequent careers in Mathura and then Dvaraka, which we shall discuss below. Moreover, it represents the meaning of Krishna’s conch Panchajanya, whose name means “five classes of beings”: 1\) devas and asuras; 2\) humans; 3\) gandharvas and apsaras; 4\) snakes, and 5\) ancestors. When Krishna blows this conch, karma is overruled and Yama restores the dead to life, presumably the dead of all five of these classes of beings. This detail is significant, because this southern sequence documents rites of protection against demons and death as represented by Bali, who resides in Sutala under the purifying protection of Narayana’s presence.

This panel continues the theme of purification for royal sadhakas, who are Shudras represented by asuras. Bali at the southwest corner and Kamsa here at the southeast corner are both asuras; each represents the Shudra ruler at different stages in his purification as a sovereign ruler. Bali represents the royal sadhaka who has received consecration to the sadhana called the Path of the Southern Doctrine discussed below in chapter 10. Kamsa represents the royal sadhaka who attains this sadhana’s fruits. After Vishnu slays the asura Kalanemi, he is reborn as Kamsa. After Krishna slays Kamsa, he attains the mode of emancipation known as “with the same shape” \(*sarupya*\). Kamsa’s persistent focus on Krishna as his enemy led to this achievement, and illustrates what Krishna tells Arjuna in the *Bhagavad-gita:* “Without a doubt, whoever has only me in mind, even at death, is freed from the body and attains my mode of being. Whatever mode of being he has in mind when he abandons the body at the end, O Son of Kunti, he has become that mode of being and inevitably attains only it. Therefore, remember me at all times and fight. If you fix your mind and intellect on me and have no doubt, you will come only to me” \(*BG* 8.5–7\). Krishna goes on to prescribe yoga as the means to this remembrance, which Kamsa’s success illustrates.

This panel also documents two purifying deaths resulting from the sadhana. The first death is of the consciousness of “This is mine” \(*mamaka*\). From this death follows the second death, of the consciousness of “This am I” \(*ahamkarana, ahamkara*\). These two deaths result in the peace Krishna describes to Arjuna: “The man who puts away all desires and walks free of longing, without the sense that ‘This is mine’ and ‘This am I,’ moves close to peace. This is the standing still *of brahman*, Son of Pritha; having reached it he is never again confused, and standing there at the time of death he falls into *brahman’s* extinction” \(*BG* 2.71–72\). Kamsa’s death at the hands of Krishna represents the death of “This is mine.” The later death of his guru and father-in-law, Jarasandha, at the hands of Bhimasena in the presence of Krishna, represents the death of “This am I.” This final death results directly from the consecration represented by Bali and Vamana, as we learn from Jarasandha’s story. Krishna disguised as a Brahmin asks Jarasandha for a gift. When Jarasandha gives it, he identifies himself with Bali who gave everything to Vishnu disguised as a Brahmin. Jarasandha offers everything, even his head, but his intent is egoistic and results in the opposite of protection: Bhimasena splits Jarasandha exactly in half, as if the ego’s perception of “I” lies on one side, and its perception of “You” lies on the other. To make these meanings evident, let us briefly turn to the stories of Kamsa and Jarasandha.

KAMSA AND JARASANDHA. Kamsa is the rebirth of the great asura named Kalanemi \(which may mean “a dark portion of time”\). Vishnu kills Kalanemi after the Milk Ocean is churned, just before he slaughters Mali, Sumali, and Malyavan \(BP 8.10.56–57; 10.1.68; these stories are depicted by Panel 20, and are discussed in chapter 10\). Kalanemi is reborn into the Vrishni lineage as Krishna’s maternal cousin Kamsa. They live in the ancient realm of the Kurus, which is at the center of Aryavarta \(the Nobles’ Realm\). Kamsa’s father, Ugrasena, is brother to Devaki’s father, Devaka. Ugrasena rules the Yadus’ realm of Shurasena from Mathura on the Yamuna River, where Hari is always present \(BP 10.1.27–28\). Kamsa remembers that he was Kalanemi and that Vishnu killed him, and begins to oppress the Yadus. He deposes his father Ugrasena, takes over Mathura, and marries the two daughters of Jarasandha, ruler of Magadha to the east. As he tells Akrura when planning Krishna’s and Balarama’s deaths in Mathura, he has significant military support. There is Jarasandha his guru, his friend Dvivida, and his friends Shambara, Naraka, and Bana; they will help him destroy all kings who side with devas. He then will then “enjoy Earth,” for she will be his possession to do with as he pleases \(BP 10.1.68–69; 36.35–36; 50.1–2\).

Jarasandha’s story begins with Brihadratha. He was a descendent of Kuru and ruled the eastern side of Aryavarta called Magadha. Brihadratha had two wives, twin daughters of the king of Kashi. According to the *Mahabharata*, Jarasandha was born in halves to both wives; this was by means of a mango a seer had blessed. Each had eaten one half of it. \(*MBh* 2.16–17; van Buitenen 2: 62–66\). According to the *Bhagavata Purana*, a single wife gave birth to a boy split in half \(*BP* 9.22.7–8\). In both accounts, the two halves were thrown out as rubbish. But they were “reborn” into a single baby when the rakshasi named Jara \(Decay or Old Age\) fused them together into a diamond-hard body. Brihadratha’s son is therefore known as Jarasandha \(Joined by Decay\), an apt symbol of the ego divided between “I” and “You.” Jarasandha now rules Magadha. He has one son named Sahadeva \(Mighty Deva\) and two daughters married to his disciple Kamsa ruling in Mathura. His capital of Girivraja \(Fenced by Mountains\) has five gateways \(like the sense organs of the gross body\). Jarasandha rules in this city and desires complete sovereignty \(like the ego in the gross body\). He therefore opposes Yudhishthira’s claim of samraj.

After Krishna slays Kamsa, Jarasandha avenges his disciple and son-in-law by attacking Krishna and Balarama at Mathura eighteen times. Between his seventeenth and eighteenth attacks, however, two significant events take place. First, a Yavana king—a melccha or barbarian—lays siege to Mathura. In the face of this threat together with that of Jarasandha, Krishna decides to found his own durga and move his people there from Mathura. He therefore builds the city called Dvara or Dvaraka \(Doorway\) in the midst of the sea off the western coast. Second, Krishna arranges for the Yavana’s death in a cave by means of the burning gaze of Muchukunda, the son of Mandhatri of the solar Ikshvaku lineage \(a story which explains that the conversion of a Yavana king to Bhagavata Dharma is a recollection of his true identity\). Jarasandha then attacks Krishna for the eighteenth time, but Krishna escapes from the mountain where Jarasandha thought he had trapped them. Jarasandha is left thinking that he has slain Krishna and Balarama, and can now do as he pleases \(*BP* 10.52.5–14\).

Krishna and Balarama dwell at Dvaraka, and Krishna completes his sovereign status by means of marriage. He first marries Rukmini and seven other primary wives. He then marries about 16,000 others, and has many children by them all \(*BP* 10.52.15–44; 53–70.21\). These 16,008 wives represent the kingdoms of Bharata, and Krishna now owns and rules them from Dvaraka in the western sea.

One day a messenger from Magadha appears in Krishna’s court to report that Jarasandha has performed the samraj rite of Victory in the Four Directions. He captured any ruler who did not defer to him, and some 20,000 of them are now imprisoned in Girivraja. This messenger has come on their behalf to tell Krishna, “They are refugees at the soles of your feet” \(*BP* 10.70.22–31\). The rishi Narada now appears to convey Yudhishthira’s invitation to attend his rajasuya at Indraprastha in the Khandava Forest. Krishna knows that the Yadus would rather fight Jarasandha than go to the rajasuya, so he asks advice of his old friend and counselor Uddhava, whom he knows will voice what he wants the Yadus to hear \(*BP* 10.70.32–47\). Uddhava responds skillfully. A ruler is qualified for the rajasuya once he has subdued his neighbors, he says, and therefore Govinda must defeat Jarasandha and release the imprisoned kings on Yudhishthira’s behalf. But Jarasandha can be killed only in a duel, and only by Bhimasena in Krishna’s presence. They must go to Girivraja disguised as Brahmins, because Jarasandha never refuses a Brahmin. Killing him and freeing the kings will be stunning acts, like the “release of the atman of the father of master elephants \(*kunjarapati*\), like the release of Janaka’s daughter Sita, and like the release of your own parents \[Vasudeva and Devaki\]” \(*BP* 10.71.9\).12

Narada and Krishna agree with Uddhava, and Krishna assures the messenger from the imprisoned kings that Jarasandha will be killed. Narada leaves, and Krishna sets out with his retinue for Indraprastha. The five Pandavas meet him with love and reverence, escort him into the city, and then into the palace built by the asura architect named Maya. A few months later, when it is time to prepare for the rajasuya, Govinda advises Yudhishthira to send his four brothers in the cardinal directions to subdue rulers and collect funds needed for the ceremonies. They enter upon this Victory in the Four Directions and are successful everywhere except eastward in Magadha \(*BP* 10.71.11–46; 72.1–16\).

Bhima, Arjuna, and Krishna now set out for Magadha to slay Jarasandha, for only then can Yudhishthira be consecrated to samraj. They are dressed as Brahmins because they know Jarasandha is devoted to them. They meet Magadha’s king inside his capital while he is distributing ritual gifts, and introduce themselves as Brahmin guests. They tell him that for his own sake he is to give them what they ask. “It is ignoble not to use the impermanent body to gain the fame of the imperishable,” they say, and cite many who “by means of the impermanent gained the permanent.” By this they mean the gift of one’s body, and remind Jarasandha of six famous examples \(*BP* 10.72.20–21\).

The first example is Harishchandra and Shunahshepa in the story told at the conclusion of the rajasuya. Vishvamitra granted Harishchandra knowledge of the Self \(*atman*\) because he and his wife had conducted the human sacrifice of Shunahshepa well. Harishchandra attained the Self by using the discipline of apyaya-yoga to devolve his consciousness from its embodiments in earth, water, fire, wind, and space, until the Self emerged in its purity \(*BP* 9.7.7–27; 16.28–37\).

The second example is Rantideva. He was attached to Vasudeva and generously gave food to both the “pure” and the “impure” at the expense of himself and his family. He was therefore freed of all physical and mental bondage and his associates became yogins devoted to Narayana \(*BP* 9.21.1–8\). The third example, Mudgala, is a son of Vishvamitra.13 He similarly gave food away at the expense of himself and his family, even though he had little, for he lived like a pigeon and gleaned whatever fallen paddy he could find. When Indra offered him heaven, Mudgala chose “extinguishing” \(*nirvana*\) instead and attained it after more severe tapas.

The fourth example is King Shibi, whom Bali cited to support his view of dana. Shibi famously gave himself away as the yajnamana does in the sacrifice, but without a substitute animal as victim. When a dove took refuge from a hawk in Shibi’s lap he was faced with a conflict in his royal dharma: he is to feed his subjects \(the hawk\) and protect them \(the dove\). His solution was to protect the dove by cutting his own body into pieces to feed the hawk.14

The fifth example is Bali, who stuck by his promise to give Dwarf as much earth as he could measure in three steps. The final example is the hunter, the pigeon, and its mate. A hunter captured a male pigeon. The pigeon’s wife saw that the hunter was hungry and gave herself to a fire in order to feed him. This self-giving act led the hunter to free her mate, to renounce his cruelty, and eventually to give himself to a forest fire. All three ended up in heaven.15

These six stories illustrate the great fruit \(*phala*\) produced by the gift of one’s body, and Jarasandha’s story is a seventh. He realizes that the three “Brahmins” who cite these examples are really Kshatriyas, and remembers them vaguely. Yet he decides to give them whatever they request, “even his self which is difficult to renounce.” Then \(in Tapasyananda’s translation\) he muses on the story of Bali and Dwarf: “Don’t we see that though deprived of all his possessions by Vishnu in the guise of a Brahmana, Bali’s unstained \(*akalmasha*\) reputation only spread everywhere thereby? Though knowing very well that it was Vishnu that had come as a Brahmana in order to deprive him of world sovereignty in favour of Indra, and though warned of it and obstructed by his preceptor Shukra, that Asura king Bali offered the whole earth in gift to Vishnu. Of what use is a Kshatriya’s body, which is perishable by nature, if he fails to earn the vast reputation of having used it in the service of holy men \(*vipula*\)?” \(*BP* 10.72.22–27; Tapasyananda 3: 354\). Jarasandha then says to Krishna, Arjuna, and Bhima, “O Brahmins \(*vipra*\), whatever you desire I will give, even my own head.”

Jarasanda is now trapped. Krishna asks for a duel, and then reveals that the other two “Brahmins” are the brothers Bhimasena and Arjuna, and that he is their maternal cousin, Krishna. They have come not for food, he says, but for a fight. Jarasandha laughs derisively. “I will not fight Krishna, because he earlier fled from me and took refuge in Dvaraka in the sea; and I will not fight Arjuna, because he is too young; but I will fight Bhimasena, because he is an equal match” \(*BP* 10.72.22–32\).

Jarasandha gives Bhima a powerful mace, takes one of his own, and leads them all to level ground outside the city. Arjuna and Krishna watch as Jarasandha and Bhima begin to fight, slamming their diamond-hard maces against each other until they splinter. Then they use their fists. This violent fistfight goes on during daylight, but at night they rest as friends. After twenty-seven days of fighting they are in a deadlock, and Bhima asks Madhava how to break it. When Krishna silently splits a twig in two pieces, Bhima gets the message. On the twenty-eighth day Bhima seizes Jarasanda by the legs, throws him to the ground, holds on to one leg as he stands on the other, and splits him from bottom to top. Jarasandha lies on the ground in the symmetrical halves Jara had fused together, each with one leg, one thigh, one testicle, one hip, one breast, one shoulder, one arm, one eye, one brow, and one ear. Magadha wails at its loss, but Arjuna and Achyuta the Unfallen embrace Bhima in honor. Krishna installs Jarasandha’s son, Sahadeva, as king. And he frees the 20,800 prisoners \(*BP* 10.72.33–48\).

The freed kings, who by now are mere skin and bones, fall prostrate at Krishna’s feet when they see him, and ask God the Ruler of Devas for protection. They are not angry with Jarasandha, they tell Madhusudana, because imprisonment has led to this vision of him. Now they understand the misery they have brought to others by their own conquests for the sake of wealth. No longer do they want a kingdom, nor the fruits of acts that lead to Heaven, only continuous remembrance of Krishna’s feet as long they exist in samsara. “Veneration to Krishna, to Vasudeva, to Hari, to the Supreme Atman, to the Destroyer of Faults for the one who prostrates,” they proclaim, “and veneration to Govinda\!” Krishna promises them deep-seated bhakti to him who is the atman and ruler of everything. He agrees that majestic wealth \(*shri*\) can drive people mad. He then instructs them how to rule as Bhagavatas: They should keep in mind that all things are transitory, sacrifice to Krishna, and with unified intent protect their subjects by means of dharma. As they produce generations of progeny, happiness and sorrow will come and go; but nevertheless they should continue to serve as kings fixed in the mind on Krishna. They should be indifferent to the body and so on, delight in the atman, and be firm in vows. If they concentrate their minds completely on him, at death they shall come to him, the *brahman* \(*BP* 10.73.18–23\). After this Krishna directs Sahadeva to have the kings bathed, dressed, and fed, to give them gifts, and to send them back to their realms in chariots studded with gold and gems. All 20,800 return to their capitals and teach their ministers the Great Person’s deeds, eager to rule as the Bhagavan had said.16

Krishna arrives in Indraprastha with Bhimasena and Arjuna, to Yudhishthira’s great joy, for Keshava’s success is an extraordinarily gracious gift. Yudhishthira’s praise of Krishna in fact sums up what this panel represents. “O unconquered Madhava, your bhaktas do not distinguish between ‘mine and I,’ and between ‘you and yours,’ for these distinctions are the defects of a beast” \(*BP* 10.74.5\). Kamsa and Jarasandha were the “beasts” and had to be slaughtered for the sake of Yudhishthira’s consecration to samraj. Yudishisthira now represents the royal sadhaka, who at the end of this southern path has been given true aishvarya.

A further meaning of this panel lies in the disordered mandala it represents. When the royal sadhaka begins walking the Path of the Southern Doctrine, his ego has supreme soverignty \(*samraj*\) over his waking consciousness. The Krishnakatha depicts this sovereign ego as Jarasandha ruling Aryavarta from Magadha in the east. Both Aryavarta and the sadhaka are disordered mandalas, as Figure 9.8 illustrates.




FIGURE 9.8. The disordered mandala. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.


Krishna describes this dismal disorder when he tells Yudhishthira about the Kshatriyas ruling at the time \(*Mbh* 2.13; van Buitenen 2: 57–60\). They all descend from Ila and Ikshvaku through the remnants of the Lunar and Solar dynasties that survived destruction by Rama son of Jamadagni. They now comprise 101 lineages ruling in Aryavarta and a vast dispersion of Yayati and Bhoja dynasties. These Yayatis and Bhojas rule beyond Aryavarta, but everyone recognizes their royalty.

Of the Kshatriyas now ruling Aryavarta, Jarasandha belongs to the one hundred and first lineage and has universal sovereignty. Krishna’s own cousin, Shishupala, is his marshal and other relatives have also joined him, including Dantavaktra. In the west Bhagadatta, who punished the Yavanas named Mura and Naraka, submits to him even though his heart is loyal to Yudhishthira. The Chedi king claiming to be the Supreme Person with the title “Vasudeva of Pundra” has also gone over to Jarasandha. Only Purujit, Yudhishthira’s maternal uncle ruling in the southwest remains loyal. Fear drives many tribes from the east and north toward Purujit in the west and south. Kamsa rules in Mathura near the heartland of Aryavarta, but he scorns his own Yadu people and aligns with Jarasandha and has married his two daughters.

The violent Jarasandha’s samraj puts this mandala in extreme disorder. This “son” of a rakshasi ruling from Magadha controls those mandala portions that in cosmic terms belong to devas: the east, northeast, north, and northwest. The Pandava sons of devas and their supporters, including those who flee Jarasandha, dwell in those portions belonging to asuras and rakshasas: the west, southwest, and south. In terms of the royal sadhaka as a microcosmic mandala, Jarasandha is the sense of “This am I” \(*akamkarana*\) ruling consciousness with a sovereignty that disorders it. Only if Krishna possesses samraj can “This am I” find its true place in the microcosmic mandala. Krishna sports on Bharata to bring both cosmos and microcosmos into order.

In the diagram, the mandala’s outer square depicts the mandala as it ought to be: devas \(white\) are to the northeast and asuras \(dark\) are to the southwest. This same order applies to Bharata represented by the large circle: the square Realm of Nobles stands at the center and the descendents of Yayati and the Bhojas rule beyond it—most important are the Yavanas and the Dravidas. But Bharata’s order is inversed. The \(dark\) Jarasandha rules from Magadha in the \(light\) east, and Krishna protects his \(light\) opponents in the \(dark\) west. Moreover, Krishna’s relatives Shishupala and Dantavaktra lead his \(dark\) family opponents in alighment with Jarasandha, while Duryodhana leads his \(dark\) Kuru opponents in alignment with Shishupala. This leaves the \(light\) Yudhishthira leading the sons of Pandu in alignment with Krishna. But these forces of light and darkness mix in complex and baffling ways. Krishna’s \(light\) army will fight against him on Duryodhana’s \(dark\) side, and so will the acharya Drona and “grandfather” Bhishma dressed brilliantly in white. And the Pandava’s eldest but unknown brother, Karna, will choose Duryodhana’s darkness over Yudhishthira’s light even though Surya the sun is his father. Yet \(dark\) Jarasandha’s son, Sahadeva, will lead Magadha’s \(dark\) armies on the side of the \(light\) Pandavas.

This opposition between \(dark\) Magadha in the \(light\) east and \(light\) Dvaraka in the \(dark\) west condenses onto the Kuru battlefield after Jarasandha is dead. The central circle represents this battleground and the complex problem the war is to solve. The war begins on the first day of the light half of the year’s darkest month called Karttika. The \(light\) Pandavas stand with Krishna in the \(dark\) west and face the \(dark\) sons of Kuru in the \(light\) east; the \(dark\) Kauravas stand in the \(light\) east and face the \(light\) sons of Pandu in the \(dark\) west. As the war conches sound, Krishna teaches Arjuna the *Bhagavad-gita*. The solution to the problem appears on the eighteenth day of battle in the dark half of Karttika. The \(dark\) Kaurava forces are almost entirely wiped out and lie strewn around the Kuru battlefield as their women mourn. The \(light\) Pandavas led by Yudhishthira now have sovereignty over what is left, east and west. Yudhishthira’s rajasuya will confirm his samraj just in time for the coming Kali Yuga.

Yet another meaning of this panel lies in the theme of the horse. Four horses appear in panels on the sanctum, two on the west and two on the east. The two on the west are victims: The asura Keshin is about to be split in half by Krishna, and the priest who will butcher Bali’s horse venerates it. The two on the east pull chariots: Akrura’s horse is hitched to the chariot carrying Krishna and Balarama, and the horse in Yudhishthira’s rajasuya stands ready to pull his. Both of the latter face south toward Mathura depicted in this panel, where no horse is depicted, but a “horselike” victim is implied. After Krishna kills Kamsa, Bhima in Magadha splits Jarasandha’s body in half as if he were Keshin.

This visual play highlights Kamsa’s death because it leads to Jarasandha’s death. Krishna’s slaughter of Kamsa in Mathura and Bhima’s later slaughter of Jarasandha in Magadha function as a narrative unit setting the stage for Yudhishthira’s rajasuya, illustrated by the final panel of the southern sequence. That panel implies much that is well known but not depicted: the Pandavas’ thirteen years of exile, the Great War of eighteen days, and Yudhishthira’s patronage of three horse sacrifices to purify him of the sin of slaughtering kinsmen. These events have parallels in Nandivarman’s life, as we noted in chapter 4.17



### ***Panel 24: Yudhishthira Dons Boar-skin Shoes at His Rajasuya***

THE STORY. Significant events leading to the episode this panel depicts are illustrated by Panels 21 and 22, and are discussed in chapter 10. The event portrayed here takes place during Yudhishthira’s rajasuya, on the first five days of Chaitra, the first month of the year. But we learn about the event from Bhishma after the Great War has ended \(*BP* 1.9.30–42\). After the winter solstice and just before he dies, Bhishma sees Krishna; his skin is dark, he has four arms, and he wears a yellow garment. Bhishma prays to him and recollects seven of the roles Janardana has “played’ for his own pleasure: 1\) a member of the Satvata clan of Yadus; 2\) Arjuna’s friend; 3\) teacher of the *Bhagavad-gita;* 4\) warrior on the battlefield and Bhishma’s enemy; 5\) Arjuna’s charioteer; 6\) a gopa loved by gopis; and 7\) honored guest at Yudhishthira’s rajasuya. Bhishma recalls that during Krishna’s “play” as honored guest, the people who had gathered there gazed with wonder and delight at him, the One who resides in the hearts of all living beings. This panel depicts their gaze.

The rite depicted here takes place between Yudhishthira’s unction and his chariot drive. It is the donning of slippers or shoes made from the skin of a boar. The shoes are slipped onto the feet of the “newborn” king, and thereafter he will wear them whenever his feet touch the ground. Later he will ascend the throne, he will watch the ritual game of dice, and he will listen as priests recite the story of Harishchandra and Shunahshepa. The rajasuya concludes when he distributes the required ritual gifts and takes his final bath.

In Yudhishthira’s case, however, the bath that ends his “birth” as king leads to the major episodes of the *Mahabharata*, which include: 1\) Duryodhana’s humiliation in the Indraprastha palace; 2\) two gambling matches at Hastinapura; 3\) the Pandavas’ thirteen years of exile; 4\) the Pandavas’ battle with the Kauravas for eighteen days; 5\) Krishna teaching Arjuna the *Bhagavadgita* on the first day of battle; 6\) the Pandavas’ disastrous victory over the Kauravas; 7\) the death of Bhishma after the winter solstice; and 8\) three horse sacrifices Yudhishthira sponsors to purify himself of the many and great sins generated by this immense slaughter of family. Only then does Yudhishthira ascend the throne of samraj \(*BP* 1.8.5–6; 1.9\).

THE PANEL. The figures in the panel face eastward \(Figures 9.9, 9.10\). Yudhishthira, the yajamana sponsor, has a mustache and he may be unshaved due to the many days he has been consecrated to the rites. The panel is badly damaged, but Yudhishthira’s dress is distinctive; it reveals that he has already been anointed and born into the might and power known as kshatra. He wears the same ritual garments Pallavamalla wore at his unction as Nandivarman, as depicted on the southern prakara wall and discussed above. A garment wrapped around the legs represents the amnion, the sac enclosing the fetus in fluid, the “inner caul of kshatra.” A wide cloth tied around his abdomen represents the chorion, a thick membrane of the placenta, the “outer caul of kshatra.” A wide cloth wrapped around his waist at the height of the navel is a turban that represents the placenta, the “womb of kshatra.” A headband or turban serves as the “navel of kshatra,” where the placenta and fetus connect. In the depiction of Pallavamalla, this headband appears to wrap around his forehead to descend as cords crossing his chest, perhaps as the umbilicus. In both depictions the hair is bound, but left exposed at the top, for the waters of the unction must touch the hair on his head, which will not be cut thereafter.18 To Yudhishthira’s right stands Yajnavalkya with his hair piled up on top of his head. Yajnavalkya is in the line of Vishvamitra through Shunahshepa, whose story concludes the rajasuya. According to Bhishma, Yajnavalkya receives Vedic knowledge from Surya the Sun, receives and edits the *Shatapatha Brahmana*, and teaches Bhagavata theology to Janaka.19 In the *Mahabharata* he is the principal adhvaryu priest in charge of these rajaysuya ceremonies \(*Mbh* 2.30.35; van Buitenen 2: 88\). The *Bhagavata Purana* does not name Yajnavalkya, but represents him in this role by means of the first priest at the rajasuya, Vyasa Dvaipayana: Vyasa’s disciple is Vaishampayana, whose disciple is Yajnavalkya \(*BP* 10.74.7–9; 12.6.51–64\).




FIGURE 9.9. Panel 24: Yudhishthira dons boar-skin shoes at his rajasuya. Photo by Sathya Seelan.





FIGURE 9.10. Left to right: Draupadi, Yajnavalkya, Yudhishthira, and Abhimanyu. Photo by Sathya Sedan.


To Yajnavalkya’s right stands Yudhishthira’s wife Draupadi, wearing a crown. She forms the anjalimudra at her left side, and looks toward the right as if to avoid looking straight ahead at Krishna, perhaps as a gesture of modesty. Her posture also suggests her passive role in this long ceremony performed by men, for it requires her presence but gives her little to do: As the wife of the sponsor she makes him “whole,” and represents the majesty \(*shri*\) and realm \(*bhumi*\) he now possesses.

The heir apparent, Arjuna’s son Abhimanyu, stands behind Yudhishthira to his left; he appears to be speaking to him over his left shoulder \(mirroring Balarama speaking to Krishna over his right shoulder on this same eastern side in Panel 12\). Abhimanyu’s right side disappears behind Yudhishthira, but his left hand appears to hold an unidentified object next to his chest. To Abhimanyu’s left stands a horse; its small size means he stands at a distance \(repeating the distant perspective of the horse in Panel 14\). The horse may be one of three brought to stand behind the chatvala pit, which is dug outside the sacrificial arena \(*mahavedi*\) to the northeast; the chariot will start its clockwise drive from there \(Heesterman 1957: 128–129, 133–139\). The loose earth dug up from this pit is used to construct the altars for the sacrifice \(Sen 1982: 68, plans 5–6\), and piles of it appear in front of the horse. The digging of this chatvala pit is analogous to a boar digging up soil; and it evokes the story of Boar carrying Goddess Earth upward, a theme we shall discuss below.

Finally, a badly damaged man kneels on his right knee in front of Yudhishthira, and stretches out his left arm as if holding something in his hand \(Figure 9.11\). He keeps his right hand at his chest. Since objects are only exceptionally given with the left hand during rituals, he must be holding the boar-skin shoes, which his poised right hand will fit to Yudhishthira’s feet.




FIGURE 9.11. Yudhishthira dons boar-skin shoes \(detail, prior to repair\). IFDI.


THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel signifies the murti Govinda; the rite of the boar-skin shoes it portrays alludes to the title Govinda, which Indra bestowed on Gopala Krishna after he had used the mountain Govardhana as an umbrella against Indra’s rains \(*BP* 10.24–27\). The word *govinda* may be glossed as “the Indra \(*inda*\) of cows \(*go*\)” to denote Indra’s subordination to Krishna’s sovereignty. But a Bhagavata tradition says *govinda* also refers to Boar’s rescue of Goddess Earth from the dark underworld waters, for it means the “rescuer \(*vinda*\) of earth \(*go*\) who was taken into a secret place” \(Bhattar 1983: name 543\). \(The murti Govinda pairs with the murti Madhava. Madhava ends the sequence by way of the north and Govinda ends the sequence by way of the south. Madhava is early morning and Govinda is late morning. Madhava is the month Magha \(Maci\) and Govinda is the month Phalguna \(Panguni\). Both embody the Pre-eminently Mighty formation facing east, because Madhava is virya and Govinda is aishvarya.\)

This panel thus alludes to the story of the Boar named Emusha \(the Terrible\) and his “rescue” of Earth. The story goes as follows. Vishvakarma, son of Bhuvana, wants to gain all of Earth and sponsors a sacrifice for this end, which Kashyapa performs. In the *Shatapatha Brahmana* it is the “Sacrifice of Everything” \(*sarvamedha*\), and in the *Aitareya Brahmana* it is the “Great Unction” \(*mahabhisheka*\). Vishvakarma promises Kashyapa that after he has conquered Earth he will give her to him. Vishvakarma achieves his goal and then sponsors a horse sacrifice, as he should. But Goddess Earth objects to being given away by him or anyone else: “Vishvakarma\! No mortal is allowed to give me away, but you have. So I’ll plunge deep down into the sea and make your promise to Kashyapa fruitless.” Earth then sinks into the waters as a mere handful of loose soil. But the Boar Emusha dives in and brings her up. She is “his heart’s delight” and he spreads her out and they beget offspring. Earth is now a mother and Emusha the Boar a father, a “master of progeny” \(*SB* 8.7.9.14–15; *AB* 8.21\).

Yudhishthira in this panel is analogous to Emusha the Boar, and his Aryavarta is analogous to Earth. According to the *Baudhayana Shrautasutra*, the “newborn” king puts on boar-skin shoes and then says, as if to Emusha the Boar, “You are the ardor of cattle. May my ardor be like yours.” Then he looks at Earth and says, “I revere Mother Earth. May I not hurt Mother Earth, may Mother Earth not hurt me” \(Heesterman 1957: 130 rev.\).

The king’s first statement addressed to Emusha the Boar, in whose shoes he now walks, requests majestic wealth \(*shri*\). The king asks for the intense energy or ardor of a boar, because intense energy is: 1\) the ability to attract cows through the abundant fat they have in common, and 2\) the ability to combine their fat. Their combined fat is wealth \(*SB* 5.4.3.19–20\). The king’s second statement requests a stable rule. Standing in the boar-skin shoes he looks down and says, “Mother Earth\! Please injure me not, nor I you\!” The king is quoting Varuna during his first and paradigmatic rajasuya. After Varuna is “born” through his rites he becomes something great, and Earth is afraid he will tear her apart the way a boar does. Varuna is likewise afraid that Earth will shake him off. “Mother Earth\! Please injure me not, nor I you,” Varuna says; and he enters into a friendly relation with her, “for a mother does not injure her son, nor does a son injure his mother” \(*SB* 5.4.3.20–21\).

The analogy of the king to Emusha the Boar and his realm to Earth, and Varuna’s address to Earth as his Mother, reveal four ideas about kingship in the rajasuya: 1\) The king’s realm is his wife, and his subjects their progeny; 2\) a brutish king may tear apart his realm; 3\) a realm may “shake off” a brutish king; 4\) the king’s realm is his mother. The rite of the boar-skin shoes appeals to this last idea, for if the realm is the king’s wife he may be brutish and his progeny may rebel against him. But if the realm is the king’s mother their relationship will be mutually dependent, caring, and protective, because this is the relation of a mother and her son.

The story of Emusha the Boar here at the end of the southern sequence alludes back to the story of Bali and Vamana at its beginning. There are three allusions: 1\) The rishi Kashyapa plays a role in both stories: At the beginning he fathers Vamana through his wife Aditi, and here at the end he serves as priest to Vishvakarma. 2\) The two sacrifices attributed to Vishvakarma match those sponsored by Bali, the “All Conquering” \(*vishvajita*\), and the “Great Unction” \(*mahabhisheka*\). And 3\) Vishvakarma, like Bali, possesses the whole Earth, loses her, and cannot fulfill his promised gift; in Vishvakarma’s case it is his promise to Kashyapa, and in Bali’s case it is his promise to Kashyapa’s son Vamana.

Finally, in this panel, Yudhishthira represents Nandivarman’s historical experience. After his rajasuya, Yudhishthira is exiled by Duryodhana for thirteen years. He regains his throne through the eighteen days of the Great War. But before he assumes the throne of samraj, he performs three horse sacrifices in order to purify himself of the many sins his slaughter of kinsmen produced. Similarly, sometime after Nandivarman’s unction as Kanchipuram’s ruler ca. 731, the attack made by the Chalukyan Vikramaditya in support of Nandivarman’s rival sent him into exile for about twelve to fourteen years. In the early 750s his Rashtrakuta father-in-law, Dantidurga, enabled him to return to Kanchipuram, where he received Bhagavata consecrations. Like Yudhishthira, he had to fight kinsmen to secure his throne. Like Yudhishthira he also had to purify himself of the sins of killing kinsmen. But instead of sponsoring horse sacrifices, Nandivarman sponsored dana rites at the temple for the Bhagavan in Nandipuram \(Tirumangai records these dana ceremonies in *PT* 5.10\).

Let us end with the question, In whose place does the viewer of this panel stand? Bhishma gave the answer as he lay dying on the battlefield of the Great War. When Bhishma saw Krishna standing before him with four arms and wearing his yellow garment he prayed to him \(*BP* 1.9.30\). The final request of his life was to join Krishna as he now saw him—which was as he appeared to the assembly earlier gathered for Yudhishthira’s rajasuya. There they had gazed at Krishna with the veneration and delight we see in these sculpted figures gazing toward the viewer \(*BP* 1.9.41\). The viewer stands in the place of Krishna.




