+++
title = "10 The Southern Panels of the Southern Pat"

+++

***“The Path of the Southern Doctrine”***





Like the panels of the northern sequence, the six panels of the southern sequence, facing south, move sequentially west to east, which in this case is counterclockwise, a normally inauspicious rotation. They likewise explain the connection of the corner panel on the south that faces west to the corner panel on the south that faces east, in terms of a consecrated ruler following a sadhana for the sake of bhukti, or worldly prosperity, which may also include mukti, or emancipation from samsara. This sequence probably illustrates what Prahlada calls “The Path of the Southern Doctrine.”1 How does a consecrated Shudra king, who rules like Bali under Narayana’s protection, have his sense of “This is mine” destroyed, and then its root sense of “This am I” torn apart? These six panels represent the answer as stages in a sadhana that appears to draw upon rites found in the *Jayakha-samhita* and *Ahirbudnya-samhita* of the Pancharatra Agama.

As the northern sequence does, these panels use crucial events in various stories to illustrate these stages. Moreover, the west-facing corner panel of this path does not lead narratively to the east-facing corner panel. In the *Bhagavata Purana*, the story of Dwarf protecting Bali in Sutala does not lead directly to the story of Krishna slaying Kamsa. The six south-facing panels we shall study in this chapter explain the connection between Dwarf and Kamsa’s death. They begin their depictions at the southwest corner of the temple’s mandala, the most inauspicious domain of sunset and of Nirriti’s disintegration.

These south-facing panels, like those that face north, fall into two sets of three divided by the central slit opening. It marks the position of the Unobstructed sitting below and facing south. Vidura describes him to Uddhava as “Aniruddha, the cow that grants all desires for Satvatas, who think of him as the fourth principle of pure being, made of mind and the womb of sound” \(*BP* 3.1.34\). The Unobstructed is the source of mantras employed in prayoga rites to protect the royal sadhaka’s well-being until his lifetime is over.

The first three panels, beginning at the southwest corner, signify the Unobstructed’s potency \(*shakti*\) embodied by mantra—for example, the twelve-syllable mantra *Om namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya*, which Aditi employed in her liquids vow \(*payovrata*\). The second three panels, ending at the southeast corner, signify the Unbstructed’s brilliant conquering power \(*tejas*\) released when mantra is activited through prayoga ceremonies—for example, tejas borm in the form of Dwarf from Aditi’s shakti womb.

In this arrangement, viewers encounter panels denoting intent \(*kriyashakti*\) before the panels denoting effect \(*bhutishakti*\), which is opposite to the arrangement on the north. On the north-south axis, bala panels are paired with shakti panels, and jnana panels are paired with tejas panels \(Figure 10.1\).




FIGURE 10.1. Pairing of bhagas along the north-south axis. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.




### ***Panel 17: Indra Disrupts King Prithu’s Horse Sacrifice***

THE STORY. Maitreya’s long telling of Prithu’s story to Vidura in the *Bhagavata Purana* develops the story in the *Satapatha Brahmana* of the first man engendered a raja in imitation of Varuna \(*SB* 5.3.5; 5.4.3.2; 5.4.3.21. BP 4.13–23\). It tells how kingship is established in the first Manu Term of this Daytime of Boar, but on the basis of a faulty horse sacrifice. Its sponsor is Anga, but he has no son and is therefore not qualified to have it performed on his behalf, and for this reason no deva comes to the rites. To remedy the problem, Anga worships Vishnu for the sake of a son. Vishnu appears holding a golden pot of milk rice \(*payasa*\). He smells the payasa and gives it to Anga’s queen to eat; she becomes pregnant. The son she begets, however, takes after her father, who is Death \(Mrityu\). The boy grows into a self-centered man pitted against dharma, and he comes to be known as Vena \(Longing\). Unable to bear his son’s tyranny, Anga leaves for the forest, and with an empty throne the realm is likely to collapse \(*BP* 4.13.21–49\). Against their better judgment, Bhrigu and other rishis appoint Vena as master. But this only increases his tyranny. Vena abolishes all sacrifices, terrorizes the population like a frenzied elephant free of the goad, and demands, because the king embodies all devas, that he be the object of sacrificial worship. The rishis have no other recourse than to kill him with the mantra *Hum*. Vena’s mother preserves his corpse by having it embalmed with mantras and medicines. In the absence of a Master of Earth \(*bhupati*\), robbery and murder arise and plunder pushes society toward ruin \(*BP* 4.14.1–40\).

The rishis conclude that they must have a ruler of the Anga lineage, so they take Vena’s preserved corpse and churn it as if churning wood to give birth to Fire \(Agni\) for a Vedic sacrifice. They begin with Vena’s thighs. From this churning arises a servile man, black-skinned and short. He asks what he should do, and the rishis say “sit down” \(*nishada*\), so he is known as Nishada. His descendents, the Naishadas, inherit Vena’s defiled dregs called kalmasha and dwell in hills and forests \(*BP* 4.14.41–46\). The seers now churn the arms of the corpse. From this churning arise portions \(*amsha*\) of Vishnu and Lakshmi as the disciplined protectors named Prithu \(Expansive\) and Archi \(Luster\). When Brahma appears he recognizes the mace insignia on Prithu’s left hand, lotus marks on the soles of his feet, the wheel portion on his palm, and knows he is a part of Hari.

Prithu is consecrated raja through rites originally followed by Varuna and now followed by every ruler after Prithu. Devas bestow on him and Archi all royal attributes in their most ideal forms. As a portion \(*amsha*\) of Sri Vishnu, Archi is female matter \(*prakriti*\) and embodies both majesty \(*shri*\) and realm \(*bhumi*\), and Prithu is male consciousness \(*purusha*\) and embodies the atman \(*BP* 4.15.7-21; 16.8; 4.15.7-21; 16.8\). He is the all-pervading witness of majesty and realm \(*BP* 4.16.12 and 19\). The nobles’ realm \(*aryavarta*\) derives from their rule, and Prithu is its paradigmatic raja. He is the first to rule Bharata divided between order and disorder, between “civilized” \(*dharmika*\) peoples living in Aryavarta’s villages, towns, and cities, and “uncivilized” \(*adharmika*\) Naishadas living southeast of civilization as aliens embodying cruel and arrogant defilement \(*kalmasha*\) *BP* 4.15.43–16.6\).

Singers now proclaim Prithu’s glory and future deeds as the embodiment of the powers of the World Protectors, Hari with the body of a “human deva” \(*naradeva*\). They summarize his career: He will rule the mandala of Earth, traverse her in his chariot like Surya, milk her in the shape of a cow, level her, and keep her safe. He will perform one hundred horse sacrifices, and during the last one, Indra will steal the horse. And then Bhagavan Sanatkumara will instruct him in knowledge of the supreme *brahman* \(*BP* 4.16.1–27\).

This panel illustrates an episode during Prithu’s final horse sacrifice, which takes place as follows. After Prithu levels Goddess Earth and adopts her as his daughter, he sponsors a horse sacrifice, the first king to do so successfully. This is the first of one hundred performed at Brahmavarta, Svayambhuva Manu’s realm where the Sarasvati River flows eastward. If Prithu completes all of them, his status on Earth will be greater even than Indra’s in Heaven. The one-hundredth ceremony is therefore an amazing assembly, and Bhagavan Hari, the Ruler, the atman of all, the guru of all worlds, is visibly present as the Master of Sacrifice \(*BP* 4.19.1–9\).

Indra is jealous, of course, and disrupts Prithu’s final sacrifice by stealing the horse. The rishi Atri sees him race through the sky disguised as an imposter \(*pakhanda*\)—someone who foolishly believes unrighteousness \(*adharma*\) to be righteousness \(*dharma*\). Indra’s hair is matted, his body is smeared with ashes, and he is nearly naked \(probably the guise of an Ajivika ascetic\). Prithu’s son chases him, but when he sees Indra’s garb he thinks his body is righteous and does not release his arrow. Atri cries out to his son, “Slay him, slay him,” and his son now charges Indra “like Jatayu after Ravana,” but Indra disappears \(*BP* 4.19.30–38\). The son brings the horse back to his father, and the rishis give him the title Vijitashva \(Victorious of the Horse\). Indra next creates dense darkness and steals the horse again; and again Atri sees him rush through the sky. Prithu’s son Vijitashva pursues him as before, and again does not harm him, for this time Indra carries a human skull and the skull-topped khatvanga staff. Atri once more urges Prithu’s son to kill him, Indra again disappears, and the son again returns the horse to his father. This repeats until Indra’s guises include “the naked, the red-robed, and the others” \(*BP* 4.19.25\). \(In the Kali Yuga these will be naked Jaina shramanas, red-robed Buddhist bhikshus, and Ajivika, Kapalika, and other ascetics judged to be outside dharma.\)

Prithu is furiously determined to kill Indra, but the priests remind him that during the sacrifice nothing except the consecrated victim may be slain. Nevertheless, they offer to use mantras to force Indra to come to the sacrifice, and then they will use *him* as the victim. Prithu agrees. But Brahma appears and puts a stop to this plan with two arguments. First, this Indra cannot be killed because he is named Yajna or Sacrifice, and is the Bhagavan in miniature \(*BP* 4.20.30\). Second, this attempt will force Hari as this Indra named Yajna to create more imposters and compound disorder, for many find imposter or pakhanda teachings attractive. Let Prithu be satisfied with ninety-nine horse sacrifices, Brahma advises, and he will be more famous than Indra. Prithu should use his own righteous rule to overcome the maya this Indra named Yajna uses to create “terrible imposter paths,” which weaken righteousness \(*BP* 4.19.30–38\).

Prithu is persuaded and gives up his final horse sacrifice. The Master of Sacrifice, who is satisfied by sacrifices, now appears as the Bhagavan Vaikuntha together with the Indra named Yajna. He tells Prithu to rule all his subjects without violence and with equity, judging them according to their differences as people who are superior, ordinary, or inferior. All the while Prithu can barely see Vaikuntha through his tears of devotion, but when he finally wipes them away he sees him standing before him like a human: His feet are on the ground and one of his arms rests on the shoulder of Garuda \(as he appears on the porch below at Panel SP3 discussed in chapter 12\). Vaikuntha offers Prithu a boon, but all he asks for is to be constantly absorbed in serving Him the way Goddess Shri is, even if it means that he and the Mother of the Moving Universe will be rivals in his service. Then Vaikuntha disappears, and Prithu returns to his capital between the Ganga and the Yamuna rivers. Prithu now exercises his rod of discipline over everyone on Earth’s seven concentric continents, excepting the clan of Brahmins and those who belong to the “Lineage of the Unfallen,” who are probably the Satvatas \(*BP* 4.20.19–38; 4.21.11–14\). In sum, the Bhagavan playing three roles—Prithu with Archi, the Indra named Yajna, and Vaikuntha—establishes that the only difference between Prithu as the Indra of people on Earth and Yajna as the Indra of devas in Heaven is merely one horse sacrifice out of a hundred. Ideally, a narendra is a very close approximation to a devendra.

THE PANEL. King Prithu and the rishi Atri move vigorously at the bottom of this badly damaged panel \(Figure 10.2\), agitated by events taking place above them. King Prithu wears a tall crown, is dressed royally, and faces forward to the south, his head tilted slightly westward and his face gazing to the southeast. His left arm extends out at his side and bends up, but its hand is missing; perhaps it pointed to the scene above. His right arm hangs down, and his right hand rests on the thigh of his straight right leg, which bears his weight as he raises his left leg up, pointing his knee eastward. A damaged object at the left side of his chest is unidentified. East of Prithu is the rishi Atri, whose head, crowned with a pile of matted locks, appears to have large earrings. His posture resembles Prithu’s, though he leans to the east. The back of his open right hand at the middle of his chest gestures alarm as his left hand rests on his upraised left thigh.




FIGURE 10.2. Panel 17: Indra disrupts King Prithu’s horse sacrifice. IFDI.


In the panel’s upper part the small figure of Prithu’s son Vijitashva, with two arms, chases Indra to the east. Prithu’s son faces southeast, his crowned head leans westward, and his right leg stretches westward as he lifts his left leg eastward in the chase. His right hand reaches to the west and grips a sword that extends diagonally up and eastward to the top of his crown. His left arm extends westward to hold a shield with its face turned away from the viewer in what may be a signal of distress.

Indra named Yajna, with a chubby body in the guise of a pakhanda ascetic, wears nothing but a slender loincloth under the fold of his belly. He is in front and below Vijitashva on what appears to be a ledge, running toward the southeast in a posture resembling that of his pursuer. He tilts his head westward, but his crown of matted hair is damaged. He extends his broken left arm eastward as his right arm reaches westward in front of Vijitashva’s left knee.

The only apparent difference between Maitreya’s telling of this episode in the *Bhagavata Purana* and its depiction here is that Maitreya says that Prithu’s son pursues Indra with arrows instead of a sword and shield. But the discrepancy vanishes if we understand the depicted sword and shield as illustrating Maitreya’s statement that after he abandons his arrows, Prithu’s son charges Indra “like Jatayu after Ravana”; the depicted sword operates like Jatayu’s talon or beak \(*BP* 4.19.14–16\).

Indra’s “imposter” guise is a body naked except for a loincloth. The only other males who wear similar loincloths in the sculptures on this Vishnu-house are the wrestlers facing east in the Madhava murti panel on this floor, and the radical ascetic \(*avadhuta*\) Dattatreya facing south on the bottom floor. Dattatreya’s avadhuta loincloth matches Indra’s loincloth here and hints at “imposter” elements in that depiction of Dattatreya, which we shall discuss in chapter 15.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. The panel identifies the king as a portion of Vishnu ruling on Earth as an Indra of Men, whose ideal status is a little less than the Indra of devas in Heaven. It also represents the origin of kingship in Vishnu’s response to the disintegration \(*nirriti*\) represented by this southwest corner.

During the first Manu Term, Vena’s longing to be the only ruler and only object of worship produces his corpse, and with it the disintegration of civilization. An integrated civilization is then born from its corpse by means of rishis “churning” it as they do wood to gain fire for a sacrifice, or soma “milk” to gain pure soma for an offering. The civilization thus born from the corpse of “longing” is social order and disorder joined in an opposition, one that replicates the opposition of Vena’s arms and thighs joined at his navel center. First, from the thighs of sexual lust emerges disorder as the Naishadas of the uncivilized wild; they embody kalmasha defilement. Then, from the arms of physical power and action emerges order as Prithu and Archi of civilized settlements; they establish majestic wealth, sustain orderly settlements, and discipline the disorder innate to the “wild” Naishadas. Further discussion of Prithu’s story appeas in Appendix 3.

The story of Prithu and his wife Archi in the *Bhagavata Purana* develops the *Satapatha Brahmana’s* account with themes introduced in the story of Bali and Dwarf \(discussed in chapter 9\): Aditi’s liquid’s vow to produce a son, Boar rescuing Goddess Earth from Rasatala, and a horse sacrifice. In at least four ways it also continues the theme of Nirriti’s inaugural rites prescribed by the *Satapatha Brahmana* for a location that corresponds to this southwest corner, where sunset and the Kali Yuga begin.

First, Maitreya overhears Krishna tells this story to Vidura as part of his last teaching on the Sarasvati River at Prabhasa. His Yadava clan has already destroyed itself and he is about to be shot in the heel by Decay \(*jara*\), the same rakshasa that joins the two pieces of Jarasandha pulled apart by Bhima. Krishna calls this teaching the *Bhagavatam* and says that he previously taught it to Brahma in the lotus at the primordial emission of the universe \(*adisarga*\) \(*BP* 3.4.9–11\).

Second, the Kali Yuga begins after Krishna leaves the earth. Uddhava wanders to the Yamuna River, meets Vidura and tells him about Krishna’s final teaching and his demise. Vidura asks Uddhava to tell him the *Bhagavatam*, but Uddhava says that before he died Krishna told Maitreya to teach it to Vidura \(*BP* 3.4.26\). To find Maitreya, Vidura goes to the Door of the Ganga \(*gangadvara*\). There Maitreya tells him this *Bhagavatam* that is simultaneously the first and the last of Vasudeva Krishna’s teachings \(*BP* 3–4\).

Third, Vidura as Maitreya’s audience belongs to this south-facing side. Vidura is sired by Vyasa along with Pandu and Dhritarashtra, but his mother is a Shudra handmaid and he is classified a Shudra. Yet he is highly learned in dharma, because, as Maitreya notes, Vidura is the human incarnation of Yama deva, and Yama, whose kingdom is in the south, is both lord of the dead and master of dharma \(*BP* 3.5.20\).

Fourth and finally, Prithu’s story falls within the *Bhagavata Purana’s* narrative about Daksha and his sacrifice \(*BP* 5\), and Daksha appears in this same southwest region on the porch below \(see chapter 12\). Daksha’s story in turn tells of Rudra Shiva as Vasudeva’s devotee, and Shiva is the master of rakshasas from the south.

We may assume that these six panels facing south follow the same distinctions between sheaths or persons that constitute the human being as are followed by the panels facing north, as discussed in chapter 6. These are: 1\) the sheath of gross matter made of “the taste of food” \(*annarasa*\); 2\) the sheath of subtle matter made of breath \(*prana*\); 3\) the sheath of finer subtle matter made of mind \(*manas*\); 4\) the sheath of still finer subtle matter made of discriminative consciousness \(*vijnana*\); 5\) the sheath of the finest matter of all made of joy or bliss \(*ananda*\). The panels represent these five sheaths in the sequence moving from west to east. This first panel, therefore, represents the first sheath, the body made of gross matter \(*sthulasharira*\). The idea of the king as a Vishnu and an Indra of Men, therefore, applies only to the king’s gross physical body, not to any of the sheaths that constitute his subtle physical body \(*sukshmasharira*\). In other words, he appears to his subjects as a Vishnu and an Indra, but not to himself, for his consciousness remains entirely human. The goal of this royal sadhana—apparently called the Path of the Southern Doctrine—is to attain true sovereignty by purifying the sheaths of the king’s subtle body so that, unlike Hiranyakashipu, he never thinks of himself as “Vishnu” or as “Indra” the way his subjects may do. In other words, this sadhana allows the Bhagavan to slay the internal “Kamsa” that says “This realm is mine,” and then slays the internal “Jarasandha” that says “I am this king.”

Moreover, the designers of this Vishnu-house use the position of this panel at the southwest corner of disintegration and its identification with the king’s gross physical body to comment on non-Vedic ascetics residing at the time in the Pallava realm. These Buddhist, Jaina, and Ajivika shramanas and Shaiva Kapalikas are identified here as deceitful people who appear to follow dharma, but in fact disrupt dharma’s social order based on Veda and its animal sacrifices. They derive from Vishnu in the mode of an Indra in Heaven ironically named Sacrifice \(Yajna\), but they teach attractive doctrines like ahimsa or noninjury, which undermine Vedic sacrifice as the basis of civilization. Like the Naishadas their bodies are defiled, for the word *pakhanda* is glossed as *papa-khanda*, interpreted to mean fragments of sin; and each of these pakhanda bodies is a fragment of this sin \(*BP* 4.19.22–25\). Moreover, like Naishadas living in defiled disorder, the adharma of these pakhanda religions illuminates the boundaries of dharma civilization.

In the Seventh Manu Term, at the beginning of the present Kali Yuga, Vishnu appears as one of these pakhandas, as “Buddha the Pure who deludes the Daityas and Danavas” \(*BP* 10.40.22\). The Daitya and Danava asuras he deludes are the pakhandas that originate in the First Manu Term, as depicted here. Vishnu appears as Buddha the Pure \(and as Mahavira and others\) to delude these asura “bodies of sin” by organizing them into systems of doctrine and discipline that harness their threat to dharma. The practitioners and devotees of these “asura” religions exist in the Pallava realm in great numbers, but they are subject to the dharma sustained by the king, who rules according to the paradigm of Prithu. Nevertheless, Kanchipuram’s rajavihara or royal Buddhist monastery, which Mahendravarman notes in his *Mattavilasa Prahasana* \(ca. 600\), the tall Ashoka Stupa reported by Hsuan Tsang ca. 640, and \(perhaps\) the shrine for Manimekhalai noted by Cittalai Cattanar in his *Manimekalai* \(ca. 550\)—all of which were south of Kanchi’s rampart—testify to the high \(if ambivalent\) social and political status of these “asura pakhandas” in the Pallava realm at the time Nandivarman Pallavamalla built this Vishnu-house for his Master.

The first step on the Path of the Southern Doctrine, then, is the ruler’s proper consecration as the Peoples’ Indra. But, as Prithu illustrates, a visceral greed for possessive sovereignty inevitably will emerge in the raja, an instinctual desire for autonomous power generated by the sense of “This is mine” and “This am I” embedded within gross body consciousness. Elimination of this greed in favor of Krishna’s sovereign authority is the second step on the path and the subject of the next panel.



### ***Panel 18: Krishna Enters Naraka’s Palace Where 16,000 Royal Virgins Are Held Captive***

THE STORY. According to Shuka, who narrates this story to the emperor Parikshit, the asura Naraka is one of several examples of rulers intoxicated by wealth and prosperity \(*BP* 10.59\). Naraka is born when Boar rescues Goddess Earth from Rasatala, but he turns out to be an asura, presumably because his mother as earth \(*prithvi*\) is matter’s densest and darkest mode. But Boar promises not to kill their son without his mother’s consent.2

With this advantage, Naraka decides to conquer the three worlds of birth and death: earth, underworld, and heaven. On earth he defeats the ruling kings and captures more than sixteen thousand virgins, whom he keeps in his fortified capital, Pragjyotishpura, the City of Eastern Light. In the underworld he captures Varuna’s umbrella of sovereignty. In heaven he seizes Aditi’s earrings and Indra’s throne. In possession of all these emblems of sovereignty, Naraka, son of Goddess Earth, is the bhupati ruling from Pragjyotishpura.

Indra complains to Krishna about Goddess Earth’s son, and the lord of Dvaraka resolves to act. He and his wife Satyabhama \(True Luster\) mount Garuda’s back and fly from their city in the western ocean to Naraka’s heavily fortified capital in the mountains to the east. When they arrive Krishna breaks through its barriers with his mace, arrows, wheel, sword, and the sound of his conch. He kills the five-headed asura named Mura, his seven sons, and then Naraka’s entire army. When he finally cuts off Naraka’s head it falls to the ground, bright with its crown and earrings \(*BP* 10.59.22\).

Goddess Earth now appears to Krishna with gifts and venerates him as having four arms, as he does in this panel, three of which hold the conch, the wheel, and the mace \(*BP* 10.59.23–31\). She venerates him as the Bhagavan, as Vasudeva, as Vishnu, as the Person, and as the Primordial Seed “full of awakened consciousness” \(*BP* 10.59.27\). She acknowledges that she \(earth\) and the other four elements \(water, fire, wind, and space\), in all their evolved combinations, are merely imposed upon him, the Bhagavan who is “not-two” \(*advitiya bhagavan*\) \(*BP* 10.59.30\). She then asks Krishna to accept Naraka’s son, her grandson, as a refugee \(*prapanna*\) to replace his father as bhupati. She asks Krishna to place his lotus hand on him, because it destroys kalmasha, and Krishna does \(*BP* 10.59.31–32\). This is the rite of Vishnuhasta.

Afterward Krishna enters Naraka’s opulant capital and finds the more than sixteen thousand royal virgins the asura ruler had kidnapped. Each one is immediately infatuated with him and thinks fate \(*daiva*\) has brought Krishna to be her husband. “May the Ordainer \(*dhata*\) make him my husband” they all pray \(*BP* 10.59.35\), and Krishna responds by having them all dressed gorgeously and sent to Dvaraka in palanquins together with the vast treasure and many horses and chariots Naraka had plundered from other rulers. The Slayer of Keshin \(*keshava*\) also sends to Dvaraka Naraka’s herd of sixty white elephants with four tusks, which belong to the species of Indra’s elephant named Airavata \(*BP* 10.59.37\).

Krishna and Satyabhama do not accompany this booty to Dvaraka. Instead, they go on to Indra’s heaven to return Aditi’s earrings. While there, Satyabhama sees the Parijata tree that had emerged from the Milk Ocean churning and is now in Indra’s court. This beautiful coral tree is one of five kalpatarus in heaven, trees that give whatever fruits are desired, and fragrant crimson blossoms clothe it after it loses its leaves.3 Satyabhama desires it for her palatial garden in Dvaraka and urges Krishna to uproot it for her. When he begins to do so, Indra and other devas try to stop him, which prompts a fight that leaves Krishna victorious. He takes the Parijata and Satyabhama onto Garuda’s back and flies away to Dvaraka, followed by swarms of heaven’s honeybees that crave the fragrance and nectar of Parijata blossoms \(*BP* 10.59.40\). Krishna plants this kalpataru in Satyabhama’s garden, just as she had desired.

At this point in his telling, Shuka makes a comment to Parikshit. When Indra begged Krishna for help with Naraka, Krishna gave it, he says, but when Krishna asked Indra for the Parijata tree Indra did not give it, and he even fought Krishna when he tried to take it anyway. “Shame on such deva stupidity,” he says, “and shame on such wealth\!” \(BP 10.59.41\).

Shuka resumes his story. After he returns with Satyabhama, Krishna properly marries each of the sixteen thousand royal virgins in Dvaraka, all on the same auspicious day \(*BP* 10.59.42–45\). He gives each one a house and he is in each house simultaneously for the ceremony. He lives as a husband with each wife individually, and each wife serves him herself even though she has a hundred slaves \(*BP* 10.59.45\). In the morning, Krishna goes out to perform his public role as Dvaraka’s ruler and all his forms as husband coalesce into one. When he returns in the evening, this single form divides so that each wife experiences herself as his \(*BP* 10.70.17\).

THE PANEL. The moment in the story portrayed here appears to be Krishna’s entrance into Naraka’s palace in Pragjyotishpura, immediately after he placed his hand on the head of Naraka’s son to cleanse him of all defilement \(Figure 10.3\).




FIGURE 10.3. Panel 18: Krishna enters Naraka’s palace where 16,000 royal virgins are held captive \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


In the top half of this damaged panel two women, each with two arms, sit upright with royal ease \(Figure 10.4\). They represent the sixteen thousand captive virgins he finds inside, all of whom he later marries. The women turn slightly toward each other, but gaze directly forward and have tall crowns. The right leg of the woman on the west is pendent, its knee touching the knee of the woman to her left with its foot pulled back. Her left foot rests flat on her seat, and her knee supports her left elbow at the level of her chest; her forearm rises upward with her fingers apparently spread apart. Her right hand rests on her right thigh. The woman on the east leans on her left hand placed palm down on her seat. Her right forearm reaches forward to display her open hand bent downward at the wrist. Her pendent left leg touches the other woman’ right knee as it stretches westward to touch toes with the latter.




FIGURE 10.4. Two royal virgins \(detail\). IFDI.


In the lower half of the panel, a crowned man with four arms faces directly forward with legs spread, his weight on his unbent left leg \(Figure 10.5\). His right leg rises high enough to rest his toes on the ground at a level higher than his left foot, as if stepping up. Only his right two arms are clearly visible. A second single left arm appears to stretch down at his left side, but his second left arm is not depicted or has disappeared. His two right arms stretch westward and bend at the elbows, the one in back upward and the one in front slightly downward. At first sight his disfigured hands resemble claws.




FIGURE 10.5. Krishna enters Naraka’s palace \(detail\). IFDI.


The remains of the man’s head present an interpretive problem. Prior to the restoration of the Vishnu-house in 1997–1998, the damaged head could be interpreted as that of a man with his hair spread out from beneath his crown \(Figure 10.6\). Or, as interpreted by a drawing of this panel published by Rea in 1909 \(Plate 82, fig. 1\), it could be interpreted as a man’s head with a single face enclosed to his shoulders by a crown and ornaments \(Figure 10.7\). But when viewed at certain angles and times of day, the damaged sides of the head may seem to be the remains of two faces. This has led some to interpret the figure as Brahma \(*EITA* 1.1 Table 9: 73\), and in 1997–1998 its head was restored to suggest this identity \(Figure 10.8\). To the eastern side of the face gazing southward is a damaged mass that has been interpreted as a face, which means there was also a face on the western side, and an unseen one on the northern side, to make four in all.




FIGURE 10.6. The head prior to repair \(detail\). IFDI.





FIGURE 10.7. The head in a drawing of 1909. From Rea 1909.





FIGURE 10.8. The head after repair. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


In my judgment, however, this is Krishna’s single head. There are three reasons for this identification. First, all other sculpted panels of this Vishnu-house match events narrated in or alluded to by the *Bhagavata Purana*, some with astonishingly close correspondence. The only event in that compendium that fits the south side’s theme of defeating asuras and involves more than one woman is the story of Krishna slaying Naraka. Second, Krishna’s victory over Naraka, and his defeat of Indra for the sake of the Parijata tree, are two of the events Narada predicts after the most eminent of Savatas has slain Keshin. Others are also depicted on this middle sanctum \(see Panel 4 discussed in chapter 6, and *BP* 10.37.11–22, esp. 17\). Third, the panel directly below on the bottom floor \(Panel S5, chapter 15\) depicts the background story to this panel. That panel represents the region of Northern Kuru \(Uttarakuru\), where Goddess Earth and others worship the Person of Sacrifice, who took the shape of Boar to embody Vedic sacrifices. After he slew the asura Hiranyaksha, he lifted her out of the waters \(*BP* 5.18.31–33\). The scene depicted is one described by Brahma and other rishis: The Causal Boar \(Karansukara\) holds Earth on his tusks like a lotus lifted up from a pond. They proclaim her to be the Mother and him to be the Father, and praise him for instilling his fiery tejas in her to evolve the world \(*BP* 3.13.34–45\). This panel on the middle floor carries the story forward to Naraka as the asura son of Boar and Earth, whom Krishna slays and replaces with his purified prapanna son.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. First, Naraka the son of Boar and Goddess Earth represents the properly enthroned ruler who, unlike King Prithu, is dominated by greed innate to his earthy body: he wants everything for himself. Naraka’s death at Krishna’s hands signifies the eradication of this kalmasha from the royal sadhaka. The sadhaka is now a purified prapanna represented by Naraka’s son.

Second, the touch of Krishna’s hand on the head of Naraka’s son presumably represents the Vishnuhasta rite performed by an acharya on his disciple to remove defiling kalmasha. The purification takes place in the sheath made of breath, the first sheath of the sadhaka’s subtle material body \(*sukshmasharira*\). Whatever ego-centered greed that is inherent to consciousness when it resides in the gross material sheath \(represented by Naraka\) is eradicated in favor of the purified ego resident in the sheath of breath. On the northern side of the sanctum \(at Panel 6\), this purification of the ego is portrayed as Rama \(the acharya\) disciplining Ocean \(the disciple’s ego in the sheath of breath\). Here on the southern side it is represented by the touch of Krishna’s hand \(the acharya\) on the head of Naraka’s son \(the royal ego in the sheath of breath\). Before Krishna touches her grandson, however, Earth venerates him as “the Person who is the Primordial Seed full of awakened consciousness.” This title points to the goal of this sadhana of the southern side: The royal sadhaka—at the end—attains the awakened consciousness embodied by Krishna, a goal represented by his enemy Kamsa.

Third, this panel signifies Krishna’s titles Naraka’s Slayer \(Narakantaka\) and Naraka’s Foe \(Narakari\), titles for a terrifying figure. Yet, since Naraka is also a name for Yama’s purgatorial realm in the south, toward which this panel faces, the “destruction of Naraka” infuses these titles with reassurance for a prapanna ruler. When Krishna \(through the acharya\) purifies the sadhaka’s ego, he removes Yama’s Naraka as his inevitable destination when he dies.

Fourth, this panel represents the establishment of Krishna’s samraj by means of his many marriages. First he married his eight primary queens one by one, and now with a single stroke has added over sixteen thousand more, each with her own wealthy household and Krishna as her husband. All of these queens are portions of Goddess Shri, who emerged through the Milk Ocean churning as Goddess Rama ever inseparable from Vishnu \(*BP* 10.59.43; 4.1.4\). And each queen represents a realm that now belongs to Krishna.

We learn this from the meanings of his first eight wives as told in the Krishna Story; the eight brides appear in the story in this sequence: 1\) Rukmini \(*BP* 10.52–54\); 2\) Satyabhama and 3\) Jambavati—their marriages are entwined due to a wondrous jewel derived from Surya the Sun \(*BP* 10.56–57\); 4\) Kalindi; 5\) Mitravinda; 6\) Satya or Nagnajiti; 7\) Bhadra; 8\) Lakshmana or Madra \(*BP* 10.58\). Each of these wives begets ten sons. But when the narrating Shuka discusses their sons, he does so in a sequence that reveals a significant division of rank among their mothers \(*BP* 10.61.7–19\).

This ranking consists of three sets of wives corresponding to the constituents of Krishna’s sovereign rule from Dvaraka. The first set of wives signifies Krishna’s majestic status: Rukmini signifies his majesty \(*shri*\), Satyabhama signifies his realm \(*bhumi*\), and intertwined with her is Jambavati, who signifies his victory \(*vijaya*\). The second set signifies Aryavarta or the Realm of Nobles which Krishna takes as his own: Kalindi represents its center, Satya represents its eastern side \(and the Solar Dynasty\), and Lakshmana represents its western side. The third set signifies the consolidation of Krishna’s Satvata clan, for both Mitravinda and Bhadra are Krishna’s paternal cousins. This allows for all four of Vasudeva’s formations to take birth and marry in a purely Satvata family, for at marriage the wife loses her father’s lineage \(*gotra*\), takes up her husband’s lineage, and becomes a bodily member \(*sapinda*\) of his family \(*Manu* 9.22–24\).

For example, the Plower as Balarama marries Revati, whereupon she becomes a Satvata. Vasudeva as Krishna marries Rukmini, who likewise becomes a Satvata. The Pre-eminently Mighty as Pradyumna is then born to Krishna and Rukmini, a “pure” Satvata on both sides. He then marries his mother’s fraternal niece, Rukmavati, and she becomes a Satvata. The Unobstructed as Aniruddha is then born to Pradyumna and Rukmavati. He marries his mother’s fraternal niece, Rochana, and she becomes a Satvata. These, then, are the Satvata heroes of the Vrishnis: Balarama, Krishna, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha. When Pradyumna’s half-brother Samba is added, there are five heroic Vrishnis. The significant Satvata female is Subhadra, born of Vasudeva and Devaki after Krishna. But she leaves the Satvata lineage through her marriage to Arjuna of the Pandavas \(*BP* 10.86.1–12\).

Krishna’s final act to establish his sovereign rule is to marry the sixteen thousand royal virgins Naraka had kidnapped from royal households all over Bharata. By marrying them he takes possession of these largely anonymous kingdoms. The realm of any king, whether he acknowledges it or not, now belongs to Krishna residing in Dvaraka in the western sea. Ideally, every king rules in the manner of Naraka’s purified prapanna son, who openly recognizes the fact that the true sovereign of every realm is Vasudeva Krishna, the master of Satvatas.



### *******Panel 19: Hari as Madhusudana, Slayer of the Asuras Madhu and Kaitabha***

THE STORY. This scene depicts an episode in the story of this kalpa’s beginning. The Unobstructed first becomes Hayagriva \(Horsehead\) to retrieve Veda stolen by the asuras Madhu and Kaitabha, and then becomes Madhusudana to slay the thieves. His slaughter of darkness \(*tamas*\) in the form of Madhu and of passion \(*rajas*\) in the form of Kaitabha explains his name Madhusudana as “destroyer of darkened or deluded passion.” He does this on behalf of Brahma, who embodies passion dominated by purity \(*sattva*\) and afterward will create spacetime in an orderly manner. The *Bhagavata Purana* alludes to the stories of Hayagriva and frequently uses the title Madhusudana for Krishna, but does not tell the story illustrated here in full. It is found, however, in three other scriptures important to Bhagavata Dharma.

One is Vaishampayana’s telling to Parikshit’s son, Janamejaya, in the Pancharatra “Narayaniya” teaching contained in the *Mahabharata* \(*Mbh* 12.335–352; Ganguli 1982, 1990 10:114–214\). He tells it as part of the story of the Unobstructed’s Hayagriva form, but does not continue with the story of Goddess Chandika Durga. Another is Markandeya’s brief account of Madhusudana, but without Hayagriva, as an introduction to the famous story of yoganidra \(sleep of unified consciousness\) as Goddess Mahamaya or Chandika Durga in the *Markandeya Purana* \(79–93; Pargiter 1969: 461–523\). Markandeya tells this famous *Devi Mahatmyam* or “Glorification of the Goddess” during his descriptions of the Manu Terms of this kalpa to a young learned Brahmin named Kraushtuki. The Goddess story explains how, during the second Manu Term ruled by Svarochisha, king Suratha becomes reborn in this Manu Term as the younger son of Surya the Sun. His elder brother, Shraddhadeva, now rules as the seventh Manu Term with the patronymic Vaivasvata; Suratha will rule as the eighth Manu with the matronymic Savarni.

The third telling is in the Pancharatra text called the *Jayakhya-samhita* and is by Narada. His depiction in this panel telling the story it illustrates points to the *Jayakhya-samhita* as its subject. We shall therefore turn to that scripture now and return to the other two later.

THE STORY OF MADHUSUDANA IN THE *JAYAKHYA-SAMHITA*. The *Jayakhya-samhita*, together with the *Satvata-samhita* and the *Paushkara-samhita*, constitute the most authoritative Pancharatra samhitas, called the ratnatraya or “three gems.”4 In the *Jayakhya-samhita* the Bhagavan teaches lessons to Narada, and Narada teaches them to the seer Shandilya at the Badari ashram on the mountain Gandhamadana \(*JS* 1; Smith 1975: 114–115\) \(Figure 10.9\). This explains the appearance in this panel of Narada sitting with his vina; he is reciting this episode of Madhusudana to Shandilya at the Badarai ashram. But this also implies another location at a later date. During the Krita Yuga, Shandilya teaches the lessons he learned from Narada to Aurva and other sages on Gandhamadana, but he does this after he touches their heads with the vishnuhasta to make them his disciples \(*JS* 1\). Later on Aurva teaches them to his son Samvarta at Prabhasa on Bharata’s western coast. The *Jayakhya-samhita* records Aurva’s teachings and thereby implies Prabhasa as its setting.




FIGURE 10.9. Panel 19: Hari as Madhusudana, slayer of the asuras Madhu and Kaitabha. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Prabhasa identifies the *Jayakhya-samhita* and its story of Madhusudana with the Unobstructed formation facing south, for it is the location of tamas and death at the end of the Dvapara Yuga. Krishna’s Yadu clan destroys itself at Prabhasa by means of his son Samba; at Prabhasa Balarama leaves the earth in yoga; at Prabhasa Krishna leaves Arjuna to protect Vasudeva and Devaki in Indrapratha and abandons his human life; and at Prabhasa the Kali Yuga begins \(*BP* 11.30.1–24; 48\). The *Jayakhya-samhita* largely concerns itself with the topics of mantra and kriya or ceremony; they provide two paths \(*marga*\) leading to different places. One path leads to worldly enjoyment \(*bhoga* or *bhukti*\) and stops there. The other path leads to emancipation from death and birth \(*moksha* or *mukti*\), but along the way may also provide worldly enjoyment. The path ending in wordly enjoyment places it in the category of prayoga, “sacrifice or worship undertaken for specific mundane gains; sometimes called ‘viniyoga,’” in the words of H. Daniel Smith \(1980: 66\). The mantras and the devas to which they refer emerge from the Unobstructed and possess a minute portion of Vasudeva’s six glorious excellences. “Therefore,” as Sanjukta Gupta explains, “they have the power to bestow on their sadhakas the spiritual excellence that may give them miraculous power, wisdom, and other religious objectives” \(1992: 186\). Both of these paths, however, differ from those motivated by the bhakti desire to serve the Bhagavan as an end in itself, and Narada teaches both types as Bhagavata Dharma. Let us now review the contents of the *Jayakhya-samhita*.

According to Aurva’s telling, when Hari appears to Narada, Narada praises him as Supreme Ruler and Supreme Cause with a thousand heads and feet and the brilliance of a thousand suns and moons. His shape is pacified purity and the abode of everything. He is the Golden Embryo who supports all embodied beings and the Supreme Atman. Yet he reclines in the transcendent space within the cave of the heart’s lotus; for those who know bhakti-yoga he truly is fearlessness and freedom from bondage \(*JS* 2.5–10a\). Narada goes on to recount to Hari his various shapes. He is Fish, Tortoise, Man-lion, and Dwarf as Thrice-strider. He is the three Ramas \(Rama of the Axe, Rama son of Dasharatha, and Balarama\). He is Krishna as a child and Krishna as Damodara Hari.5 He is Kapila of Samkhya and Yoga. He is the three formations: Samkarshana for those who know, Kama armed with flowers for those who desire, and Aniruddha for the rule of everything “by your conquest.” He is Brahma to emanate the whole moving universe, Rudra to destroy it, and Agni, the shape of sacrifice with a fiery mouth, to carry oblations to devas and pitris \(*JS* 2.11–18\). After this praise, Narada asks the Bhagavan to please tell him how everything comes into being.

According to Sanjukta Gupta, Pancharatra theology divides Vasudeva’s transformation of his self through his Shakti into creation divided between the pure and the impure \(1992: 179–183\). Pure creation consists of his embodiment through Shakti as transcendental, as subtle, and as gross. Impure creation consists of him as the world made of matter \(*prakriti*\) and as the deluded souls \(*jiva*\) inhabiting it. The *Jayakhya-samhita* focuses on pure creation in order to explain the mantras, and the devas they designate, which Vasudeva graciously has revealed for the sake of jivas living deluded lives within samsara’s material whirl.

Hari teaches Narada about pure creation by using the concept of shape \(*rupa*\). He begins with the end of the process. This final stage is his gross shape with parts \(*sakala*\). This manifest pure shape corresponds to Brahma in the lotus attached to the Unobstructed’s navel. Brahma emits the impure creation of spacetime and the jivas dwelling in it. Impure creation in this Vishnu-house is represented by the top sanctum, where the icon of Krishna once stood. If we think of each shape \(*rupa*\) as a body \(*sharira*\), panels on the outside of this sanctum would form its “skin.” But there are no such panels on the top-floor sanctum; they appear instead as the panels on the vimana and porch enclosing the sanctum below. Hari next describes his unmanifest shape without parts \(*nishkala*\). This subtle shape corresponds to the three formations rearranged as a male sleeping inside this sanctum on a snake before Brahma appears. This panel is one of those on its outside that constitute its “skin.” Hari concludes with his own shape. This shape contains the other two and corresponds to Vasudeva sitting inside the sanctum below. The sculptures of the three formations outside constitute its “skin” \(*JS* 2.28 and heading\). Let us now consider each of these shapes in the order Hari describes them to Narada.

Vasudeva’s shape made of parts is the Unobstructed reclining in the waters. This formation is Vasudeva’s fully differentiated state called viratpurusha and contains all phenomena that will come into being with spacetime, including avatars, mantras, and the devas to which mantras refer \(Gupta 1992: 186\). All of these appear within spacetime through Brahma, for spacetime is Brahma transformed. Brahma’s appearance with four faces begins in darkness just before his day \(*JS* 2.30–75\). By means of the splendor of his unified omniscience, the Unobstructed’s ability to increase his size as he wills sends out the water lily of his heart. Its root is his navel and its shape is of requisite breadth and of extraordinary splendor. The unobstructed Hari then emits Brahma, who is made of mental activity \(*manas*\), into the center of the blossom and gives him four faces.

Brahma’s eternal body is the knowledge from which the moving universe emerges and is replete with all sacraments \(*samskara*\), with the Veda and its limbs, and with the vibhuti powers beginning with animan, the ability to become minute.6 But Brahma’s passion \(*rajas* or *raga*\) is excessive because he thinks he is the only cause, self-born as it were, in the lotus. Whatever Brahma produces, therefore, is chaotic; he makes worlds and then has to unmake them. An arrogance of self-sufficiency is his problem, and it is due to a lack of knowledge about his true origin in Hari, even though he is attached to Hari’s great shape through the lotus.

To educate Brahma, Hari creates earth \(*bhumi*\) in the midst of the water inside the lotus. With the pleasure of battle in mind, he then lies down on it in yoganidra, the sleep of unified consciousness. Two drops of his sweat descend into the lotus stalk and become desire \(*kama*\) and anger \(*krodha*\) in the shape of two asura brothers. Desire is the elder and his name is Madhu \(Sweet Intoxicating Drink\). Anger is the younger \(for anger is born when desire is frustrated\), and his name is Kaitabha \(Of Desire’s Likeness\). Their natures are desire and anger dominated by darkness \(*tamas*\). “Whose lotus is this?” they wonder. To find out, they move up the stalk to the bottom of the blossom, which is the Patala realm. From there they move up to the blossom’s interior and stand in amazement when they see Brahma. “What’s with this one born of a lotus?” they wonder \(*JS* 2.37–51\).

When Madhu and Kaitabha see Earth \(*prithvi*\) in the middle of the water they approach her, intent on pulling her out. But they then perceive the evolution of all things \(*vibhava sarva*\) and conclude that all causation of the world belongs to them who are unconquered; they decide that they are what holds all the worlds together. They grab Veda away from Brahma. And from that moment everything moving and unmoving is threatened by deep darkness, because Veda is Brahma’s eyes for creating. Madhu and Kaitabha take Veda down to Patala, leaving the unfinished moving worlds above in a state of severe disorder \(*adharma*\) \(*JS* 2.52–56\). Brahma seeks the advice of devas and sages who also belong to the Unobstructed’s body and learns that this disaster has occurred because he thinks he is the uncaused Primordial God \(*adideva*\) of samsara. But the Supreme Cause caused him, they tell him, and he is Vishnu. They advise Brahma to pray to Vishnu, and he does.

Vishnu’s response to Brahma’s prayer is to divide his shape of knowledge \(*vidya*\) and delusion \(*maya*\) into two. The first shape is “my own shape made of knowledge” \(*JS* 2.64\). In this shape, which includes *brahman* as sound \(*shabdabrahma*\), he descends to Patala. By uttering *Om* he gets hold of the Veda and returns it to Brahma. This shape corresponds to Hayagriva of the “Narayaniya” account \(Ganguli 10: 180, also 136, 148–149, and 163\).

The second shape is “my own great shakti fashioned into a shape made of mantra” \(*JS* 2.70\). Vishnu tells Narada that in this shape he slayed Madhu and Kaitabha: “I grabbed their necks with my two hands in play, smashed their thighs, and dispatched those asuras wearing necklaces of gold. \[Goddess Earth\] became an abundantly full stream of wealth because of their fat \(*medas*\), and from then on she has been known as Medini, “earth having the fat of fertility” \(*JS* 2.71–73\). Madhusudana exemplifies mantras as portions \(*amsha*\) of Vasudeva fashioned from the brilliant constituents of Shakti as sound \(*JS* 6.220–221a; 6.59–60a; and Bhattacharyya 1967 in *JS:* 22–26\). The *Jayakhya-samhita* prescribes the ceremonies by which these sonic portions of God may be employed to attain specific goals.

Hari now tells Narada about the process of differentiation that ends with the Unobstructed formation. It begins with Pradhana, the material Originator who is mahat or Great. Shakti produces her from her self as without beginning, unborn, and unmanifest.7 Hidden within the Great are three material threads \(*guna*\), and Shakti will cause her to set them in motion to produce herself as matter transformed \(*prakriti*\). The Great Originator first produces the thread of sattva, sattva then produces the thread of rajas, and rajas produces the thread of tamas.

This sequence of “threads” corresponds to Vasudeva’s three formations. Vasudeva produces the Plower dominated by sattva to be his self embodied as splendor \(*prakasha-atma*\). The Plower produces the Pre-eminently Mighty dominated by rajas to be his self embodied as transformation \(*vikritya-atma*\). And the Pre-eminently Mighty produces the Unobstructed dominated by tamas to be his self embodied as material elements \(*bhuta-atma*\) \(following Bhattacaryya 1967 in *JS:* 19–20\). Brahma’s lotus is rooted in the navel of this viratpurusha, whose body is all the differentiated forms that will ever come to be.

Hari now tells Narada about the source of differentiation. It is the supreme Vasudeva’s nonmaterial shape made of consciousness \(*chidrupam*\). Vasudeva as pacified awareness is the supreme *brahman* of supreme joy in the shape of splendor.8 Sanjukta Gupta identifies this as a contraction of Vasudeva’s “ever-manifest” \(*nityodita*\) state with six glorious excellences in full display into a “tranquil” \(*satodita*\) state, a state of total stillness and omnipotence. This supreme Vasudeva “agitates” his shape of splendor to transform it into two modes corresponding to the Plower and the Pre-eminently Mighty. The Preeminently Mighty infuses the latter mode with consciousness to produce the Unobstructed:

\[Vasudeva\] agitates his flaming splendor and uses the tejas of this cloud of light to pour out the brilliant shape of the Bhagavan as Unfallen \(*achyuta*\). The Unfallen’s unfelled tejas spreads out his shape and Vasudeva \[now\] abides as a billowing cloud of dharma.

\[The Unfallen\] agitates his self and the brilliant figure of True Being \(*satya*\) arises \[in this billowing cloud of dharma\] like a bubble on the ocean.

\[True Being\] uses his brilliance made of consciousness to produce the Infinite \(*ananta*\) named Person \(*purusha*\) and the Great \(*mahat*\) in brilliant diffusion. He indeed is the abode of all devas, the Supreme Ruler \(*parama-ishvara*\), who sustains them from the inside \(*antaryami*\) and \[sustains them from the outside\] in the garment of their \[avatar\] rescuers….

Person \(*puman*\), True Being \(*satya*\), and the Unfallen \(*achyuta*\)—these threefold shapes of consciousness \(*cidrupa tritaya*\) abide within Vasudeva’s own shape of pacified awareness. \(*JS* 4.4–8,13, in my translation\)

Vasudeva’s agitation of his pacified awareness corresponds to his self as vyuha Vasudeva, and as Sanjukta Gupta emphasizes, these two are the same; when the sadhaka knows the vyuha Vasudeva he automatically knows the para Vasudeva.9

The important teachings in the *Jayakhya-samhita* concerning the use of mantras to attain emancipation and worldly enjoyment are summarized in Appendix 4.

THIS TEACHING IN THE *BHAGAVAD-GITA*. A condensed summary of these doctrines about Vasudeva’s creation appears in chapters thirteen, fourteen, and fifteen of the *Bhagavad-gita*. Krishna, who is Vasudeva on earth, teaches Arjuna the “supreme knowledge of omniscience” in chapter fourteen. But he prepares Arjuna for it in chapter thirteen by teaching him about the Unobstructed. He begins, as Hari does in the *Jayakhya-samhita*, with the end of creative emanation and moves backward, but in his case the end is the impure creation of spacetime and the jivas embodied in it. Succinctly stated, Krishna’s ultimate goal is to have Arjuna join him in his supreme home and be like him, but he first has to be free of samsara.

Krishna starts off with an agricultural metaphor to explain that each material body is a field \(*kshetra*\), and that each field contains a conscious knower of the field. He then identifies his self as the field-knower in every body \(*BG* 13.1–2\). He explains the nature of the field and how to live to be free of it, and then moves on to “what should be known” \(*jneyam*\), a knowledge that confers amrita \(*BG* 13.12\).

What should be known is the “beginningless Supreme *brahman*,” which Krishna has already identified as “my highest home” \(*BG* 13.12; 8.21\). But the aspect of the Supreme *brahman* that should be known is not para Vasudeva, but the Unobstructed viratpurusha, the Person reclining on the Snake in the waters of matter. This should be known because the Unobstructed is established in the hearts of all and can be perceived \(*BG* 13.13–17\). Perception of him leads through the Pre-eminently Mighty to the Plower, and from there to the vyuha Vasudeva who is para Vasudeva.10 As Krishna states, “My bhakta” who knows the field, knows the field-knower, and knows what should be known, “becomes fit for my mode of being” \(*BG* 13.18\).

Krishna teaches Arjuna about the Unobstructed. He is the Great Ruler of matter \(*prakriti*\) and of the person \(*purusha*\) embodied by it who experiences pleasure and pain. This Great Ruler abides in the embodied person \(*deha*\) and some call this Supreme Person the Supreme atman \(*BG* 13.22\). Through visualization \(*dhyana*\) by their self, some see the Unobstructed as the Supreme atman in the atman. Others see it by the discipline of analysis \(*samkhyena-yogena*\) and others by the discipline of ritual action \(*karma-yogena*\). But those who do not know those methods may hear of it from from others, and those who worship with complete dedication to what they hear also go beyond death \(*BG* 13.24–26\). This, of course, refers to refugees \(*prapanna*\) following the path of refuge out of trust in Krishna’s words. These devotees, Krishna says, are “my supreme bhaktas and I love them exceedingly.” Arjuna already knows this distinction between refugees and those who rely on dhyana, samkhya-yoga, or rites, because Krishna has taught it to him \(*BG* 12.1–12\). Krishna tells Arjuna that whoever sees this Supreme Ruler sees truly and walks the supreme path leading to *brahman* and beyond.11

Krishna has now prepared Arjuna for the supreme knowledge of omniscience in chapter fourteen. This is knowledge of Vasudeva and his pure creation. Those who depend on it, he says, “attain a rank equivalent to my own” \(*BG* 14.2\). Arjuna has already learned that Vasudeva is Supreme *brahman*, but he now learns that matter \(*prakriti*\), as a transformation of Shakti’s Originator \(*pradhana*\), is Great *brahman* \(*mahad brahma*\).

*Brahman* has two dimensions, and Krishna uses a sexual metaphor to explain their relationship. “My womb is Great *brahman*” he says, “and I plant the seed \(*bija*\) in it.” As father he plants his seed and as mother she embodies it as her embryo \(*garbha*\). From this embryo arises the origin of all beings \(*BG* 14.3\). The embryo is the Unobstructed reclining on the Snake in the waters, and Brahma rooted to its navel is the origin of all beings. The production of all beings thereafter is merely a replication of this first conception of pure creation, because, Krishna says, *“brahman* the Great is the womb of all the wombs in which material forms come into being and I am the father who provides the seed” \(*BG* 14.3\). This explains how Vasudeva is present in the atman of all embodied beings, as Arjuna learned in the previous chapter. Just as a pregnant woman contains a fetus, each embodied being \(*dehin*\) contains a seed \(*bija*\) of Vasudeva in the heart of consciousness. This seed is the Unobstructed reclining on the Snake.

Those who know that the Unobstructed as this bija seed is beyond the threads of matter, and also serve Krishna with the discipline of devotion \(*bhaktiyogena*\), pass beyond matter’s threads and are fit to become *brahman*. The undying and unchanging para Vasudeva is the base supporting the *brahman* they are fit to become \(*BG* 14.26–27\). This means they are fit to become *brahman* as Great on their way to join *brahman* as Supreme, who is para Vasudeva.

Krishna describes this journey to Arjuna in chapter fifteen, using the metaphor of a tree, a woodcutter, and a bird. The universe of spacetime rooted like a lotus in the Unobstructed’s navel resembles a great asvattha fig tree. Its fatly nourished roots dangle down from their originating root high up in the branches of the host tree, where a bird once dropped an asvattha seed. The fig tree took over the host and grew into a sprawling world where birds nest and eat its figs. None dwelling inside the tree can see the whole of it, nor its beginning or its end, nor what it is that sustains it. But when a woodcutter fells it, the birds fly away in freedom from their limited world. Krishna tells Arjuna to be both woodcutter and bird: “Use the powerful axe of nonclinging to cut down this firmly rooted asvattha, and with ‘I take refuge in that Primordial Person from whom ancient creativity flowed forth,’ search for that high realm from which those who reach it do not return … for that is my highest home” \(*BG* 15.1–4, 6\).

Narada’s telling of the story of Madhusudana in the *Jayakhya-samhita* accounts for this sculpted panel and implies the mantras and liturgies of this important Pancharatra text. The telling of the same story in the “Narayaniya” of the *Mahabharata* appears on this Vishnu-house through Hayagriva, the panel facing north at the northwest corner of the porch below \(Panel NP1; *BP* 5.18.1; 7.9.33–39\). The telling in the *Devi Mahatmyam* of the *Markandeya Purana* may also be illustrated on this Vishnu-house, but I have not seen it.

THE PANEL. Madhusudana’s long body at the center of this panel divides it horizontally into three portions. In the center, viewed as if from above, he stretches out on the Snake as bed, turned toward the viewer, his head to the east and feet to the west \(Figure 10.10\). He rests his body within the Snake’s coils, points his right foot upward, his left foot westward, and pillows his tall crown in the Snake’s five hoods, which shield it slightly. He has one pair of arms. He bends his right forearm up at the elbow and with his right hand forms what appears to be a fist \(the mushtimudra or balimudra\) facing the viewer. He stretches his left arm straight eastward with his left hand to the side of the Snake’s hoods.




FIGURE 10.10. Madhusudana and the upper portion of the panel \(detail\). Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Viewers who follow the southern sequence approach this panel coming from the west, as do the two asuras depicted at his feet in the upper portion. Madhusudana looks at the approaching viewers in the same way as he looks at the approaching asuras, perhaps an intended detail. The asura brothers above Madhusudana and the figures below him are viewed from the side. Madhu \(desire\) and Kaitabha \(anger\) stand behind the Snake bed at Madhusudana’s feet. They face southward, but look eastward toward the reclining Person. Madhu’s right arm stretches out to point his left index finger mockingly at his face, while his right hand holds a mace extending diagonally over his right shoulder. Kaitabha stands behind him, his right arm hanging down at his side, while his left hand held at his chest points its index finger in the same manner.

The center of this upper portion of the panel is badly damaged and its sculptures have crumbled. At the top in the center Brahma sits on a lotus throne, faces southward, and forms an indecipherable mudra with his right hand. Two figures fly at his sides, each raising the left hand as if in astonishment. Below Brahma’s right side is a right leg bent at the knee; this is all that remains of what must have been one of two figures, the other below Brahma at his left side. They would have depicted two of the Bhagavan’s four weapons as persons, if we follow the guide of similar depictions of this scene at seventh-century Mamallapuram and sixth-century Deogarh in the north \(Srinivasan 1964: 155, note 2, and plate XLVIII; Huntington 1985: 209, plate 10.29\). The wheel named Sudarshana would be a handsome youth, and the conch named Panchajanya would be a short male with a pot belly.

All three figures in the panel’s lower portion are beneath the Snake bed \(Figure 10.11\). On the east under Madhusudana’s outstretched left arms sits the rishi Narada with his vina. The top of his matted hair touches the Snake. His legs cross at the ankles and his raised knees support the vina in his right hand; he plucks with the fingers of his left hand as he sings the story depicted by the panel. The other figures depict two of the Bhagavan’s weapons as persons. On the west sits the gada or mace named Kaumodaki \(perhaps meaning “wicked pleasure”\). She appears as a crowned female with one pair of arms quietly kneeling. Her body’s upper part faces south toward the viewer while her lower part faces east. Her right knee rests on the ground as her lower leg bends up behind her to the west. Her right arm extends under her breasts to place her right hand near her left elbow. This elbow rests on her eastward-leaning left knee supported by her left foot on the ground, and her left hand appears to hold an object, perhaps the remains of a mace.




FIGURE 10.11. The lower portion of the panel \(detail\). Photo by Sathya Seelan.


The third person, positioned directly under Madhusudana’s navel center, is a male with one pair of arms and hair flying out from under his crown, which means he is in motion. He faces the viewer as his right side thrusts westward, propelled from the east by his left side. His straight right arm \(broken off near the elbow\) and his raised right knee thrust westward, and his right hand holds a broken object, probably the remains of a knife or sword. His lower left leg and foot propel this thrust from the east, and his fluid left arm stretches behind him eastward to maximize the force of his stabbing right hand. He is the knife or sword known as Nandaka \(He Makes Happy\). We know from the story that Madhusudana uses two hands to kill the asura brothers. Presumably he holds them with his right hand and kills them with the knife or sword held in his left hand, represented by this central male on Madhusudana’s left side thrusting westward toward the asuras.

Krishna in the *Bhagavad-gita* supports this identification of the weapon as Nandaka. At the beginning of the Great War, Arjuna is paralyzed by the dilemma of his dharma as a Kshatriya and concludes: “Even if they kill me, Madhusudana, I do not want to kill them, not even for the sake of ruling the three worlds, much less Earth \(*Mahi*\)” \(*BG* 1.35\). Krishna responds by teaching Arjuna many things, including the supreme secret \(*rahasya uttama*\) he once taught to Vivasvat the Sun, who taught it to Manu, who taught it to Ikshvaku, who passed it on to royal rishis of the Solar Dynasty until it was lost \(*BG* 4.1–3\). He now reveals it to the Lunar Dynasty through Arjuna. First he teaches his and Arjuna’s true identity \(as the inseparable rishis Narayana, who remembers, and Nara, who forgets\). Then he expounds the proper nonclinging relation of ritual performers to the fruits their rites produce when performed by one devoted to him. After this he explains the meaning of jnana: it is the knowledge “by which one sees all beings without exception in the atman, then in me” \(BG 4.35\). He concludes his teaching of the supreme secret this statement: “Therefore arise, son of Bharata, take up yoga and with the sword of jnana cut this self-doubt born in your heart of ignorance” \(*BG* 4.42\). This violent act of cutting doubt makes one “happy” and explains why Krishna’s knife or sword is known as Nandaka.

Several people viewing this Madhusudana panel with me in December of 2003 said they perceived the depiction of Goddess Chandika Durga’s battle with the asura Buffalo in the badly damaged stucco above the central window that follows this panel. This window marks the location of the Unobstructed below and is a logical place for such a depiction. The Madhusudana panel signifies shakti prior to spacetime, the Goddess embodies the tejas produced by shakti after spacetime has been created, and the Vishnu murti panel directly after this window signifies tejas operating on behalf of devas on the shore of the Milk Ocean. The depiction of Durga fighting Buffalo they perceived would document the transition from this Madhusudana panel to that Vishnu panel. But in the press of time I was not able to study the damaged stucco and cannot say that I saw it myself.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. The panel represents the murti Madhusudana, and signifies the potency \(*shakti*\) of the Unobstructed formation. It also represents this potency as embodied by mantras used for the sake of worldly gain \(*bhukti*\) and emancipation \(*mukti*\), but here most immediately for bhukti. Rites for bhukti alone are called prayoga, the “hurling or casting of missiles”; the missiles in this case are mantras. Shakti emits tejas or brilliant conquering power to destroy all obstacles to prosperous longevity by keeping amrita out of the hands of asuras and keeping rakshasas at bay. Aniruddha’s tejas defeats enemies of Bhagavata rulers, protects their realms, and facilitates the expansion of borders for the prosperity of their subjects.

But this panel also implies the sequel to this story, which Markandeya tells in the *Markandeya Purana* as the *Devi Mahatmyam* or “Glorification of the Goddess.” The *Jayakhya* tells us that the Person we know as Madhusudana is Aniruddha’s potency \(*shakti*\) acting to eliminate Brahma’s ignorance prior to his creation of the universe and Daytime of Boar. According to the *Devi Mahatmyam*, once Brahma has done this, Aniruddha’s brilliant conquering power \(*tejas*\) enters into the universe as Goddess Chandika Durga, whose initial task is to slay the asura called Mahisha or Buffalo. The next panel, which flanks the other side of the central window of this southern side, represents this tejas, but as we shall see, it does not use the figure of Goddess Durga to do so. The tejas she embodies appears in the temple only as multiple depictions of her lion.

Furthermore, this panel denotes the third sheath of the royal sadhaka, the sheath made of manas or mind, which Brahma embodies. The Madhusudana story may be understood to be a metaphor for the purifying potency of a mantra in the mind of a royal sadhaka who performs rites for the sake of worldly enjoyment or bhukti, but does not truly know who he is when he does. Like Brahma, he knows the means, but the results of his rites are faulty. And like Brahma, desire and anger appear to threaten everything including him. “A person who visualizes objects of the senses develops a clinging to them,” Krishna tells Arjuna in the *Bhagavad-gita*, “and from this clinging desire arises, and from desire anger is born.” Anger then leads to delusion, to loss of memory, to the ruin of intelligence, and to destruction \(*BG* 2.62–63\).

According to this interpretation, shakti in the shape of mantra enters into the sadhaka’s mind, just as the Person on the Snake enters Brahma’s lotus, perhaps whispered into his ear by his acharya. The shakti of this mantra then purifies the sadhaka’s mind of desire and anger, just as the Person on the Snake frees Brahma of Madhu and Kaitabha. Impelled now by a passion free of desire and anger, the sadhaka, like Brahma, creates through the rites of Veda and enjoys what is created. Yet the sadhaka and Brahma both know that Vishnu, the uncaused Supreme Cause and Primordial God of samsara, is the source and purpose of it all.



### ***Panel 20: Vishnu Kills Mali, Sumali, and Malyavan on the Shore of the Milk Ocean***

THE STORY. This panel continues the story of the Churning of the Milk Ocean from the Mohini episode depicted below at Panel S6 and discussed in chapter 15. After Vishnu as Mohini distributes the amrita to devas, asuras attack to take it back. War breaks out on the shore of the Milk Ocean \(*BP* 8.10–11\). Bali, son of Virochana, leads asuras in a magical vehicle named Vaihayasa \(Moving in the Air\), which the great asura yogin named Maya \(Architect\) created to move however its rider desired. \(The asura Maya will also appear in the stories of the next two panels.\) Indra, mounted on the elephant Airavata, leads devas. The war begins with the hurling of abuse, but then turns to individual fights, and the shore is soon filled with bones, heads, and blood.

Bali in his vehicle and Indra on his elephant are evenly matched until Bali resorts to magic \(*maya*\) and hides himself. He sends a mountain that drops blazing trees and sharp rocks, and he sends pythons, vipers, and scorpions; lions, tigers, and wild boars; and naked rakshasa females with tridents and rakshasa males crying “Cut, pierce.” Bali also rains down flaming cinders through winds and clouds flashing with lightning, and stirs the ocean into giant waves and deep whirlpools. The frightened devas appeal to the Bhagavan as sustainer of the worlds, and Vishnu now appears with eight arms and sitting on Garuda. Bali’s magic immediately dissolves, for “remembering Hari is freedom from all dangers.” The asura Kalanemi riding a lion throws a trident at Vishnu, who catches it and uses it to kill him and his mount. Vishnu then uses his wheel Sudarshana \(Beautiful to See\) to decapitate three brothers: first Mali, then Sumali, and then Malyavan.

Indra, who holds his thunderbolt \(*vajra*\) of a hundred joints and eight sharp edges, is emboldened and derisively boasts that he will chop off Bali’s head. But Bali responds with wisdom: “Fame, victory, defeat, and death in battle come according to Time’s ripening of karma. Wise people know this and are neither elated nor downcast, but you don’t seem to be one of them, for you think yourself the agent of your destiny. Your abuse is meaningless.” With this, Bali shoots a volley of arrows to which Indra responds with a blow from his diamond-hard vajra, and, like a mountain with severed wings, Bali falls to the ground in his magical vehicle Vaihayasa.

The battle rages on and Indra wields his vajra victoriously until he attacks Namuchi \(He Does Not Release Rain\). The vajra cannot pierce even the skin on Namuchi’s neck. Indra suddenly senses the unexpected workings of karma, just as Bali had said. Disillusioned by the vajra, Indra resolves never use it again. A voice then reveals to him that Namuchi can be killed only by something neither dry nor moist. Indra performs visualization and perceives foam; so he takes foam from the Milk Ocean and cuts off Namuchi’s head. Devas resume their attack, but before they destroy all the asuras Brahma dispatches Narada to stop them. “You relied on the arms of Narayana and obtained amrita,” Narada says, “and you have prospered by the grace of Shri. Now stop fighting.” Obediently the devas control their anger and return to Heaven. With Narada’s permission, asuras carry the badly wounded Bali toward the western mountain. Their acharya Ushanas \(Shukra\) revives the asuras who still have their limbs and heads, and with his touch brings Bali to consciousness. Bali awakes defeated, but does not grieve, for he sees the nature of the world with clarity.

THE PANEL. This badly damaged panel divides vertically between Vishnu with eight arms seated on Garuda on the west, and three asuras, each with two arms, aligned vertically on the east \(Figure 10.12\). Vishnu faces directly south, wears a tall crown, and tilts his head slightly to the west as he sits on Garuda’s shoulders; his left leg hangs down over Garuda’s left shoulder and his right leg bends under on Garuda’s right shoulder. Among the arms on his right, the front one stretches up and holds the wheel; a hand below that one holds a sword, which extends back behind the arm above; below that a third hand holds a mace, which extends diagonally up to the edge of the panel. The fourth arm and hand have disappeared. On his left side the conch is visible above his head, but the arm holding it has disappeared. Below it another arm reaches out, bends up at the elbow, and holds something unrecognizable. Beneath it his front arm bends down at his side and its hand at the level of his waist holds the middle of a bow, whose tip reaches the top of Vishnu’s crown and curves down to follow his gracefully bending head and torso. The remains of another hand appear near this elbow.




FIGURE 10.12. Panel 20: Vishnu kills Mali, Sumali, and Malyavan on the shore of the Milk Ocean. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Garuda’s head has a small crown and emerges in front of Vishnu’s left thigh facing forward. He holds the bottom of Vishnu’s left foot with his left hand, and reaches up on his right to support Vishnu’s bent right leg on his shoulder. Garuda’s left thigh and knee are raised to the east as he bends the lower leg back under him, the foot pointing downward. The right leg stretches out to the west in a flying movement, bending slightly upward at the knee.

At the bottom, Malyavan holds a large mace in his left hand; his right arm and hand have broken off \(Figure 10.13\). He wears a crown or turban and stands with legs spread. Sumali emerges from behind Malyavan, his right thigh and leg stretching down Malyavan’s right side. His head with a crown or turban leans eastward, and his right hand at the level of his chest holds a club stretching diagonally up across his upper arm. His left arm reaches eastward, bends back at the elbow, and holds something over Malyavan’s head. Mali emerges over Sumali’s right shoulder wearing a tall crown \(Figure 10.14\). His right hand at his shoulder holds a mace stretching diagonally upward. His left arm extends eastward, bends up at the elbow, and, with its back to the viewer, his hand spreads his fingers open as if in alarm.




FIGURE 10.13. The asuras Sumali in the middle and Malyavan on the bottom \(detail\). Photo by Sathya Seelan.





FIGURE 10.14. The asuras Mali on the top and Sumali in the middle \(detail\) Photo by Sathya Seelan.


THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel represents the murti Vishnu, and it signifies the brilliant conquering power \(*tejas*\) of the Unobstructed formation, which is the effect of the previous panel’s potency \(*shakti*\). It also concludes the story of the Churning of the Milk Ocean, which begins in the predawn Brahma Hour on the northern side of the sanctum \(at Panel 7\). The story ends here in the afternoon of the sanctum’s southern side with a war between devas and asuras over the prosperous longevity \(*amrita*\) their churning had produced by means of Ajita’s indefatigable power.

Moreover, the panel represents the conquering role of Vishnu’s wheel Sudarshana in the sadhana, which leads the royal sadhaka to true sovereignty and the bhukti goal of prosperous longevity. The moment depicted is just after Vishnu has killed Kalanemi with his own trident, and just before he decapitates Mali, Sumali, and Malyavan with the wheel Sudarshana. After his slaughter in this story, Kalanemi was reborn as Kamsa, who Krishna slays in the east-facing corner panel \(Panel 23\). The name Kalanemi appears to be composed of *kala* meaning “time” and *nemi* meaning “the felly of a wheel” or “a portion.” In this context, Kalanemi refers to the portion of time, to the segment of the wheel of time, that is represented by the afternoon leading to sunset. Perhaps *kala* as “black” is also intended, so that the asura Kalanemi represents the darkness that increases as day moves toward night, and as the Dvapara Yuga moves toward the Kali Yuga. In the sadhaka’s waking consciousness, that dark portion is represented by Kalanemi’s rebirth as Kamsa.

Once Vishnu had slain Kalanemi, he slew Mali, Sumali, and Malyavan, three brothers whose names are variations of *mala*, meaning “garlanded.” The Valmiki *Ramayana* \(7.5–9\) tells us that Malyavan the eldest, Sumali the younger, and Mali the youngest but strongest, are powerful rakshasas, “equals of the Three Sacrificial Fires,… rivals of the Three-eyed God \[Rudra Shiva\],… as powerful as the Three Vedas and as formidable as the three humours of the body” \(wind, bile, and phlegm\) \(Shastri 1957–1959 3: 384–401\). Mali, Sumali, and Malyavan represent a deep darkness \(*tamas*\) that is threefold. In other contexts, it is kalmasha.12

The three brothers rule to the south in Lanka and are learned in Veda, but harass devas, rishis, nagas, and yakshas. When their rakshasa forces march forth to slay devas, however, Vishnu appears on Garuda, having eight arms holding the conch, wheel, mace, bow, and sword \(*Ram* 7.6.65\). Vishnu slays only Mali in this telling; Sumali and Malyavan flee to Patala for refuge \(*Ram* 7.8.22\). Sumali’s daughter Kaikasi later begets Ravana and his brothers with the sage Vishravas. Their children, except for Vibhishana the youngest, are cruel and appear fierce because Kaikasi approached this Brahmin muni at a “dreadful time” \(*Ram* 7.9.15, 22–23; 27\). This “dreadful time” is late afternoon and sunset on the mandala’s southern side, for this is when Diti similarly approached her husband Kashyapa and gave birth to the asuras Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha, as discussed in chapter 8.

In the terms of sadhana, the sadhaka relied on a product of his own consciousness \(the ocean\) after it had been infused with mantra \(the milk\), and had been churned by Narayana through recitation \(*japa*\). It was an insubstantial weapon created from his own consciousness, whose effectiveness, however, derived not from himself but from Narayana’s pervading and acting mode as Vishnu. The panel illustrates the point of the story: Remembering Hari through mantra emancipates the purity of consciousness from the overwhelming threats of defiled passion generated by “asuras.” Mantras embodying the Bhagavan’s shakti are potent with tejas. In the struggle with powers that delude embodied consciousness—the demonic senses represented by the hundreds of rakashasas shouting “Cut, pierce,” and by their naked women carrying tridents—mantra recitation in japa allows Vishnu to eradicate them.

As Vishnu removes kalmasha from the hour of the Sudarshana ceremony, he presumably removes kalmasha in the sadhaka sponsoring it. These purifying acts take place in the royal sadhaka’s sheath made of discriminating consciousness \(*vijnana*\). In the previous panel representing manas, Aniruddha’s shakti in the mantra shape we know as Madhusudana acts inside the lotus prior to the universe. Here, Aniruddha’s tejas, in the shape of Vishnu with eight arms, acts on the shore of the Milk Ocean after this universe has been created. Devas and asuras battling on the shore over amrita represent vijnana’s dichotomous consciousness in the royal sadhaka during a kriya ceremony performed for the sake of worldly gain or bhukti. The previous panel refers specifically to the *Jayakhya* and its rites, and this panel appears to refer to the rites of Vishnu’s wheel Sudarshana, which the *Ahirbudhnya* contains. Let me suggest how the stories of this panel correlate with these rites.13

First, Vishnu appears and Bali’s magic instantly dissolves; this clears the field for the battle over the amrita to proceed. Vishnu then slays Kalanemi with his own weapon; this removes kalmasha from the afternoon period of the ritual performance. After this Vishnu uses his wheel Sudarshana to slay Mali, Sumali, and Malyavan, who are Ravana’s elder relatives; this eliminates rakshasa impurities from the sadhaka’s vijnana consciousness. Now the sadhaka’s discriminating consciousness correctly perceives distinctions, which are represented by Indra opposed to Bali. But in the story the removal of the rak-shasas emboldens Indra to attack Bali arrogantly with his vajra, and Indra defeats him. Bali does not struggle with his defeat because he knows that what is gained or lost in battle is due to karma ripened by Time, not due to what one does oneself. Indra does not understand this until his vajra cannot kill the asura Namuchi. Then, through dhyana visualization, a voice guides him to foam as a weapon. Indra takes foam of the Milk Ocean and slays Namuchi with it. His vajra is a useless weapon and he abandons it.

Why foam and not the vajra? According to an ancient creation story discussed at Panel W1 in chapter 11, foam is the origin of nine creations that constitute Bhumi or Earth. This insubstantial substance that is neither dry nor wet is the origin of everything, and it has power over everything derived from it. This is why foam and not diamond-hard vajra can slay the asura Namuchi. In the royal sadhaka, we may assume, this foam of the Milk Ocean represents his mantra-infused vijnana consciousness, which is the basis and source of all distinctions he perceives. This sanctified vijnana leads Indra to know what Bali already knows: that actors in this battle do not write their roles, they are written by another. The difference between Indra and Bali, the oppositions inherent to vijnana consciousness, has finally disappeared in regard to knowledge; but in disposition they remain deva and asura. The sadhana now moves to a deeper purification of consciousness.



### ***Panel 21: Krishna Slays Shishupala at Yudhishthira’s Rajasuya***

THE STORY. The event depicted in this panel takes place after Krishna, Arjuna, and Bhima have returned to Indraprastha from Magadha, and have reported Jarasandha’s death to Yudhishthira \(*BP* 10.74\). His response summarizes the purified vijnana context of this panel: “Your devotees do not distinguish between ‘mine and I,’ and ‘your and yours,’ Unconquered Madhava, for these disfigurements belong to beasts” \(*BP* 10.74.5\).

Preparations begin for Yudhishthira’s rajasuya to be conducted in imitation of Varuna’s. On the first day, which is the first day of Chaitra, the first month of the year, he receives consecration \(*diksha*\) to the rites. On the fifth day, when the soma is extracted, he honors the priests and the assembled representatives of his realm. The question arises of who should be honored first. There is no agreement until Sahadeva, the youngest of the five Pandavas, argues in favor of Krishna: “Honor the Unfallen, the Bhagavan Master of Savatas as the best, for these devas and everything such as place, time, and wealth are his self; everything here is his self and does it all; his self is the fire, the offerings, the mantras, the supreme goal of samkhya and yoga; his self is one without a second and the source of this moving universe; his self is his own refuge, and from his self he emanates, preserves, destroys” \(*BP* 10.74.19–21\). Not suprisingly, the assembly is persuaded. Yudhishthira then worships the feet of the “Lord of the Senses” \(Hrishikesha\) by bathing them and pouring the water from his feet over his own head. Others do likewise. \(The murti Hrishikesha standing on a lotus, we recall, begins this counterclockwise sequence of the sanctum’s southern half; see Panel 13.\) After Yudhishthira offers Krishna silk clothes and gold ornaments, he stands with tears in his eyes as others shower flowers on Krishna, venerate him, and shout “Namo Jaya,” “Veneration and Victory.”

But Shishupala \(Child-protector\), who is the king of the Chedis and Krishna’s father’s sister’s son, is enraged. His jealous anger at Krishna had been increasing ever since Krishna thwarted his efforts to marry the Vidarbha princess Rukmini and took her for himself \(*BP* 10.52–54\). Shishupala had aligned himself with Jarasandha, Shalva, Dantavaktra, Vidhuratha, Poundraka, and Rukmi against Krishna and Balarama; and to strengthen their alliance, Shishupala was to have married Rukmi’s sister Rukmini. In the meantime, however, she had fallen in love with Krishna and would marry only him. Overnight, Krishna appeared in the Vidarbha capital, “kidnapped” her, and took her away to Dvaraka, grievously humiliating his future brother-in-law Rukmi.

At Yudhishthira’s consecration, Shishupala’s angry jealousy now emerges in full force. He rises from his seat, raises his arms to address the assembly, and hurls vicious abuse at Krishna, who ignores his words \(*BP* 10.74.30–37\). Many close their ears and walk out cursing \(*BP* 10.74.38–46\). The Pandavas and others arm themselves to attack Shishupala, who, while hurling abuse at them too, takes up his sword and shield. But Krishna restrains them, turns to his cousin in anger, and cuts off his head with his wheel Sudarshana. In the uproar that follows, Shishupala’s supporters flee for their lives \(*BP* 10.74.44–46\). But those who remain see something amazing: A brilliant light emerges from Shishupala’s body and enters Vasudeva Krishna. It is Jaya or Victory, the guardian of Vaikuntha, who has now fulfilled the curse of Brahma’s four Kumara sons. First he was born as Hiranyakashipu, then as Ravana, and finally as Shishupala, but all the while he focused continuously on the Bhagavan as his enemy, and this passionately angry gaze has led him back to Vaikuntha. The irony of the earlier acclamation of Krishna, “Veneration and Victory,” is now revealed: Veneration of Krishna leads to his victory over Shishupala and to Victory’s release from birth and death. “Victory” now dwells with a form of pure sattva in the presence of Vasudeva \(*BP* 3.15–16\).

Yudhishthira distributes ritual gifts and takes the ritual bath. Krishna, the Ruler of the Ruler of Yogins, stays on a few months to help complete the rites, and then Devaki’s son returns with his family to his own city.

THE PANEL. The badly damaged panel depicts Krishna, with four arms and a tall crown, standing on its west side and facing forward to the south \(Figure 10.15\). It depicts the moment just before Krishna cut off Shishupala’s head with his Sudardshana wheel. His right leg bears his weight as he lifts his left leg to step eastward toward Shishupala, who stands at a lower level. He raises up his front right hand as if to strike down at Shishupala’s head; the object he holds is surely the wheel with which he will slice off Shishupala’s head. He appears to grip the back of Shishupala’s head with the front left hand, turning it back to the southwest as if it were a sacrificial goat’s head.14 Krishna’s back right arm swings down in an arc at his right side; his back left arm bends up parallel to his head and no doubt holds the conch.




FIGURE 10.15. Panel 21: Krishna slays Shishupala at Yudhishthira’s rajasuya. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Shishupala’s crowned head is pulled toward the southwest while his body faces east. The weight of his body is on his left leg, which stretches straight down to the platform, while his right thigh and knee move eastward in a step that leaves the lower leg and foot hanging vertically in the air. Of his two arms, only the right is visible as it reaches eastward, probably to draw his sword. Below the platform on which Shishupala stands is the head and shoulder of a crowned figure emerging from the bottom of the panel. Most likely this is Jaya or Victory, who will merge with Krishna once he has decapitated Shishupala.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel continues the theme of vijnana from the previous panel. We know this from the pattern established by the northern sequence. The corresponding panel on the north side depicts Narasimha ripping open Hiranyakashipu with his vajra nails \(Panel 9\). The victim here is Shishupala decapitated by Krishna wielding the Sudarshana wheel.

Interpreted in the terms of the sadhaka, the story tells us that Sudarshana chakra rites have eradicated a lingering and deadly opposition to Krishna as the most excellent of sovereigns. It is an opposition with a public face, directed outward to the sadhaka’s social position in the world. Originating from Vaikuntha, the realm of pure consciousness, it first expressed itself as Hiranyakashipu, the asura ruler who demanded autonomous self-sufficiency, unaware that the pervading actor, Vishnu, was hiding inside his own consciousness. But the Man-lion Consecration removed that public arrogance.

The opposition emerged again as Ravana, the ten-headed rakshasa in the southern ocean of waking consciousness, who preyed on Vedic society and, driven by lust, refused to bow to anyone. The “embankment” \(*setu*\) of self-discipline constructed by the monkeys of the mind under the acharya’s stern gaze, represented by Rama, led to his eradication. The devout Vibhishana ruling in Lanka under Rama’s authority represents the sadhaka now living in public under the authority of the acharya.

Finally, with the Vibhava-diksha, Balarama, Krishna, and their entire extended family entered the center of the sadhaka’s consciousness, into his heart. As Krishna matured and entranced the sadhaka’s entire inner life, opposition to his sovereignty over the sadhaka’s daily life emerged in his waking consciousness in its most dangerous public form. It was the patrilineal rival’s jealous claim for the same woman, a jealousy fueled by shame. Krishna had “kidnapped” Shishupala’s promised bride in full daylight at the commencement of his wedding ceremony; Shishupala’s public humiliation shamed him into contesting Krishna in the very public arena of Yudhishthira’s rajasuya. Likewise, the sadhaka had lost his claim to any realm entirely of his own, and part of him was ashamed and angry and jealous of the one who had taken it away. But the “Path of the Southern Doctrine” eradicated that rivalry. Even intense jealousy fueled by the shame of being subordinate to him turns out to be intrinsic to Krishna’s play within the sadhaka’s consciousness, and his play is not over yet.



### ***Plate 22: Krishna Attacks Shalva and Dantavaktra***

THE STORY. Shishupala’s friend King Shalva had been with Rukmi and Jarasandha when the Yadus defeated them after Krishna had “kidnapped” Rukmini. Shalva vowed to destroy all the Yadus. He performed tapas for Shiva and in return received boons, notably a vehicle built by Maya and named Saubha \(Splendorous\). It cannot be destroyed by devas, asuras, people, or gandharvas, can go anywhere desired, and terrorizes Vrishnis. And Maya shrouds it in darkness to make it invisible \(*BP* 10.76–77\).

While Krishna and Balarama are away from Dvaraka to attend Yudhishthira’s rajasuya at Indraprastha, Shalva in this Saubha vehicle attacks their island city with a huge army. Krishna’s eldest son, Pradyumna, launches a counterattack, but Shalva’s vehicle is more than he can handle. Eventually, a mace hits Pradyumna on the chest and fells him. His charioteer takes him out of battle and brings him to consciousness, to Pradyumna’s anger, for his removal makes him appear a coward. But he has only done his duty, the charioteer says, because the laws of battle require master and driver to protect one another. Pradyumna purifies himself with water, reenters the battle, and fights for twenty-seven nights.

During this time in Indraprastha, Krishna slays Shishupala at Yudhishthira’s rajasuya, completes his role in the ceremony, and then sees omens of evil. Immediately he sets out for Dvaraka and finds Shalva destroying his people. Leaving Balarama in charge of Dvaraka’s protection, Keshava tells his charioteer Daruka to take him near Shalva, the master of Saubha who is adept in magic \(*maya*\). Krishna begins to decimate Shalva’s army. Shalva throws a spear at him, but Krishna cuts it down with his arrows, and then shoots sixteen arrows at Shalva’s vehicle. Shalva then hits Krishna’s left arm, knocks his bow from his hand, and jeers at him: “O fool, Shishupala was your own father’s sister’s son and my friend. You killed him in the assembly hall because he was unguarded. If you dare stand before me, I will send you to a realm from which you shall never return.” Angered, Krishna strikes Shalva on his neck with his mace, which then returns to him. Shalva vomits blood and disappears.

Suddenly, a weeping man appears and says that Krishna’s mother, Devaki, sent him. “Shalva tied up your father,” he says, “and took him away like an animal to the butcher.” Grieving for his father, Krishna wonders how that could have happened. Shalva then appears holding Vasudeva, and in Krishna’s presence, cuts off his father’s head with his sword and takes it up in his vehicle to the sky. For a while, Krishna is stunned. Then he realizes it is all Shalva’s magic, which he learned from Maya, and then and there resolves to kill him.

At this point, Shuka stopped his narration with a comment to Parikshit \(*BP* 10.77.30–32\). “That is the way some seers tell the story,” he said, “but they do not realize it is contradictory. How could Krishna have sorrowed since he was not ignorant? How can there be infatuation \(*moha*\) in him who wipes away ‘the beginningless grasper that is the opposite of the Self’?” Interestingly, that “beginningless grasper” refers to the snake Kaliya, on whom Krishna dances in the panel directly opposite this one on the north-facing side \(Panel 10\). Shuka’s interruption reveals an editor glossing, while preserving, authoritative lore. Chronological layers to the purana thus appear.

Shuka takes up the story again. Krishna shoots Shalva with his arrows, shatters his armor and bow, cuts off the jewel on his crown, and smashes his vehicle to pieces with his mace, which then falls into the sea. Now standing on the ground, Shalva rushes at the “Immoveable” \(Achyuta\) with his mace. Krishna uses an arrow \(*bhalla*\) to cut off Shalva’s arms. Then, appearing like the eastern mountain crested by the sun, he takes up his blazing wheel. Just as Indra cut off Vritra’s head with the vajra, Krishna uses the Sudarshana chakra to cut off Shalva’s head with its earrings and crown.

Dantavaktra \(Crooked Tusk\), the king of Kalinga, Krishna’s mother’s brother’s son and Shalva’s close friend, now approaches Krishna in revenge \(*BP* 10.78.1–16\). Alone and on foot, with mace in hand, his huge body shakes the earth with each step. Krishna seizes his mace and jumps down from his chariot to confront him. “Though you are my cousin,” Dantavaktra says, “I am going to destroy you, for you are an enemy in the guise of a relative.” With a great roar, he hits Krishna on the head with his mace. Unmoved, Krishna strikes back with his mace, hitting Dantavaktra on the chest. Dantavaktra vomits blood, falls to the ground, and dies. Then, just as in the death of Shishupala, a subtle light passes from Dantavaktra into Krishna as everyone watches. This light is Vijaya, younger brother to Jaya who had been Shishupala. First Vijaya was Hiranyaksha, then Kumbhakarna, and finally Dantavaktra; and with his death at Krishna’s hand the stories of Jaya and Vijaya come to an end.

But there is still Dantavaktra’s brother Viduratha \(perhaps Harasser of Chariots\). Krishna comes at him with sword and shield and beheads him with his wheel Sudarshana. Beings everywhere burst into praise at this act: Krishna has destroyed the Saubha vehicle, Shalva, Dantavaktra, and at last Viduratha. Only those who have the perception of beasts ever think Krishna is defeated, for he is the Master of Yoga and Ruler of the Moving Universe, and is always and everywhere the victor.

THE PANEL. The panel, badly damaged and repaired, portrays the moment Krishna confronts Shalva after his vehicle, the magical Saubha, falls into the sea in shattered pieces \(Figures 10.16, 10.17\). The correspondence between text and image in this case is a literal depiction of narrative metonymy, for the panel depicts Shuka’s use of Garuda as the emblem of Krishna’s chariot entering battle. “Everyone on their own side and on the other saw the entrance of Garuda, younger brother to Aruna, charioteer of the Dawn” \(*BP* 10.77.11\). Krishna flying into battle on Garuda is Krishna riding into battle in his chariot driven by Daruka.




FIGURE 10.16. Panel 22: Krishna attacks Shalva and Dantavaktra. Photo by Sathya Seelan.





FIGURE 10.17. Krishna slays Shalva and Dantavaktra \(composite, prior to repair\). Photo by Hudson, 1990.


The panel divides in half between Krishna astride Garuda on the west and Shalva and Dantavaktra on the east. Krishna, who is crowned, looks to the south, tilts his head slightly eastward, and sits astride Garuda. His left leg stretches over Garuda’s left shoulder and down toward the east, pointing its foot eastward. His right leg is pulled up and rests its foot flat on Garuda’s right shoulder, pointing its bent knee eastward. Krishna has two pairs of arms. He presumably holds the wheel in his front right hand, which is in the panel’s upper western corner; and he probably holds the conch in his back left hand, which is up near Shalva’s head. Below his right knee his back right hand holds a mace, which stretches up his right side to end near his front right elbow. He reaches with his front left arm across his chest to his right side, where he holds an undetermined object, probably the weapon called bhalla. Garuda’s head has either a small crown or a small pile of hair and emerges between Krishna’s thighs facing south, but tilts westward. Both his arms have broken off. His right leg stretches back to the west in flight, bending up to parallel the panel’s edge. His left knee rises up to the east and his left foot points down toward Dantavaktra.

Shalva with a tall crown and two arms stands east of Krishna. The lower portion of his body moves eastward as he stands on his left leg and steps to the east with his right leg, his thigh raised and his foot at the panel’s edge. His torso, however, twists south toward the viewer and his head west toward Krishna. His right arm mirrors Krishna’s gesture by reaching across his stomach to his left side where he holds a large mace, which stretches up to the middle of his crown. His left arm is not visible. Dantavaktra emerges from the entire bottom of the panel. His crowned head points toward Shalva’s feet, and the lower parts of his legs disappear into the panel’s lower frame. He holds a bulbous mace with his right hand, and it rises toward Garuda’s right thigh; his damaged left arm bends inward at the elbow, but the hand is undetermined.

The position of the two major figures on platforms at different levels depicts the ritual context in which Krishna killed the cousin who hated him. Krishna on the higher level indicates that he has just received veneration as the chief guest. Shishupala sitting at a lower level had stood up to berate him, and had taken up his shield and sword in self-defense. Shishupala’s right hand may be in the act of drawing his sword. The arrangement suggests that Krishna grabbed Shishupala’s head from behind just as he stepped forward to attack the Pandavas and others.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. The panel represents Aniruddha’s tejas completing its purification of the royal sadhaka. This final purification takes place in the fifth sheath made of joy or bliss \(*ananda*\), which embodies a unified consciousness basic to the dichotomous vijnana. This final purification is apparently by means of the sadhaka’s breath, for Krishna slays Dantavaktra with his mace Kaumodaki, not with his wheel Sudarshana. Gada the mace represents prana’s vitality, force, and power pervading the sadhaka’s subtle material body \(*BP* 12.11.14\). Moreover, Dantavaktra’s death occurs after twenty-seven nights of battle with Krishna’s son Pradyumna; Krishna presumably slays him on the twenty-eighth day, the end of the lunar month.

This death frees the sadhaka from a sin Shuka calls “the grasper that has no beginning and is opposed to the atman.” Jaya and Vijaya represent this sin as Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha, as Ravana and Kumbhakarna, and finally as Krishna’s kinsman Shishupala and Dantavaktra. Shishupala is Krishna’s paternal cousin, a kinship relation significant to public status. Shishupala contests Krishna’s status first through a public struggle over a woman, and then through a highly charged public attack on his character. As we observed at the previous panel, this story vividly represents the power of this sin to distort the vijnana consciousness of the royal sadhaka. But Dantavaktra is Krishna’s maternal cousin, a kinship relation significant to domestic rather than public status. Dantavaktra attacks Krishna’s firstborn son Pradyumna at home in Dvaraka while public attention is focused on Krishna at Yudhisthira’s rajasuya.

In the sadhaka, Dantavaktra’s insidious betrayal of the intimate relation of a boy to his maternal uncle in the privacy of the family represents this sin in his sheath made of ananda, which is the fundamental and most intimate dimension of any person. Krishna purifies ananda of the sin Dantavaktra represents, and the royal sadhaka is now prepared for the rites conferring true sovereignty. As discussed in chapter 9, Krishna will now slay in the royal sadhaka any perception as king that “This realm is mine” and that “I am its ruler.”

Dantavaktra’s death ends the story of the gatekeeper Conquest \(Vijaya\); he was the subtle light that left Dantavaktra and entered Krishna. Conquest had now rejoined his brother Victory \(Jaya\) in Vaikuntha. First as Hiranyaksha, then as Kumbhakarna, his final birth as Dantavaktra led to the purification of Krishna’s maternal lineage and completed the purification of his extended family. Interpreted in terms of the sadhaka, Krishna had eradicated and absorbed rivals of his own clan, who had entered the sadhaka along with him. As we recall, Krishna entered the center of the sadhaka’s consciousness \(*hridaya*\) after his birth at Mathura, when Vasudeva carried him across the raging Yamuna River at night and switched him with the infant form of the Goddess Yoganidra \(Sleep of Unified Consciousness\), at Yashoda’s side. As Krishna grew from infancy to manhood within the sadhaka, so did his clan rivals. Now, however, the sadhaka was completely free of any opposition to Krishna’s protective sovereignty. The sadhaka was now prepared for the throne of waking consciousness as represented by Ugrasena, who sat enthroned in Mathura.

UGRASENA ON MATHURA’S THRONE. Ugrasena \(Having the Formidable as Master?\) ruling in Mathura represents the “I” of the Bhagavata sadhaka that rules under the sovereign protection of the formidable Krishna at Dvaraka. Initially, like any ruler before he underwent Bhagavata consecration, Ugrasena in Mathura was vulnerable to self-centered desire born of his own nature. That desire took the form of the asura named Kalanemi, who took birth as Ugrasena’s son; and the son, we recall from the discussion of Harischandra and Shunahshepa in chapter 9, is the father reborn. In other words, Ugrasena had been seized by the dark portion of time signified by Kalanemi; it is a portion that falls in the afternoon as the sun moves toward sunset into the darkness of night and the Kali Yuga, and is characterized by possessiveness. As that dark possessiveness, Kamsa rebelled against his father, jailed him, and took the throne for himself. The dark sense that “this is mine” now ruled the ruler of Mathura. He thereafter treated the realm as if it were his own, as if he, the “Indra of People” \(Narendra\), were to be worshiped by all his subjects.

Yet the next panel \(Panel 23\), which is around the corner and faces east, depicts Krishna pulling Kamsa off of that throne, after which he will restore Ugrasena to the throne, and thereafter protect him in Mathura while ruling his own realm of Dvaraka. As we noted in chapter 9, when Kamsa died, a light passed from his body into Krishna. Because of his undeviating enmity—which energized his continual focus on Krishna—Kalanemi born as Kamsa disappeared into Krishna, just as Jaya and Vijaya later would. The newly restored Ugrasena represents the sadhaka’s proper sense of possession, which is that that everything belongs to Krishna. Now awake in the gross body, Krishna protects that purified awareness from the “doorway” \(*dvaraka*\) between the eyes. With a clear vision preserved by Krishna himself, the sadhaka is prepared to exercise the true sovereignty, which Yudhishthira in the next panel represents.

To sum up these six south-facing panels, the ritual stages of the “Path of the Southern Doctrine” begin with consecration into the acharya’s prayogic protection as refugee \(*prapanna*\), which the Dwarf and Bali panels on the west represent. The result is final purification and true sovereignty in the morning of ritual action, which the Kamsa and Yudhishthira panels on the east represent. They face eastward toward Indra’s realm, as did the emperor Nandivarman when he sat on his throne in eighth-century Kanchipuram. As an “Indra of People” \(Narendra\), Nandivarman II Pallavamalla ruled as a true emperor \(Parameshvara\) because he ruled as a “slave of Krishna” \(Bhagavata\) in a line of sadhakas that descended from the first emperor, Prithu.



