+++
title = "05 The Temple Mandala and the Bottom-floor Sanctum"

+++





## **The Temple Mandala**

In concept, the plan of the Emperor’s Vishnu-house is a square, its outer boundary marked by a high stone wall. The acharya who guided the royal architect in constructing it followed a mandala. A mandala is a map; it begins with a central point and moves outward toward the four cardinal directions in a sequence of squares and circles. The entire mandala arena of the Vishnu-house is most likely a built form of the *chakrabjamandala* important to Pancharatra ceremonies; it is composed of a wheel \(*chakra*\) with an eight-petal lotus blossom born of water \(*abja*\) at its center. The example shown in the frontispiece comes from the *Padma-samhita*. These colors have many specific meanings, but according to the *Padma-samhita*, a specific color is identified with each of the cardinal directions that the sides of this mandala face, and they also correspond to the formations or vyuhas God makes; the square sanctum on the vimana’s bottom floor depicts the vyuhas as icons \(*archa*\).

We may interpret the colors of the mandala as follows. The open lotus blossom denotes God’s throne. The color white emanating from it northward is the purity of omniscient knowledge or jnana; it is associated with the Plower \(Samkarshana\). The color red emanating from it eastward is the impassioned consciousness of sovereignty or aishvarya, and is associated with the Pre-eminently Mighty \(Pra-dyumna\). The color black emanating from it southward is potency of shakti. Shakti commonly denotes power, but here it refers to the potency of God’s power to create and delude, and is also known as maya, “delusive creativity.” The dark or black is associated with the Unobstructed \(Aniruddha\). The color yellow emanating from it westward is Hari. This name for God refers to the tawny color of the male lion, which frequents the mountains in the north. The seer or rishi named Dirghatamas describes this tawny lion in the mysterious poem *Rig Veda* 1.54: Vishnu is a ferocious wild beast wandering in the mountains; this beast takes three wide strides, and in his footsteps are the three worlds. But his highest footstep \(*padam*\) is beyond them, above the pole star called Dhruva, and it shines down on mankind as Vishnu’s brilliant padam of refuge. Depictions of Hari as a lion in the shape of a man \(Narasimha\) and as a man taking strides \(Trivikrama\) derive from this seer’s ancient vision, as do the lengthy stories about them both in the *Bhagavata Purana*.

The tall enclosing prakara wall defines this mandala of five concentric squares, each symbolizing a level or layer \(*kosha*\) of God’s body, whether visible or invisible to us. The outermost layer is this outermost prakara wall, analogous to the skin of our body. The innermost layer is the sanctum hidden inside the towering vimana, analogous to the hidden life \(*jiva*\) that owns our body. These mandala squares are not immediately apparent to the visitor who has just entered through the prakara gateway. This is because the architect pulled the four central panels on the vimana’s western wall away from it, and used them as the face of the porch \(*ardhamandapa*\) leading into the vimana where God resides. To accommodate this arrangement he likewise extended the western side of the enclosing prakara wall. This altered version of the Vishnu-house mandala is illustrated by the ground plan published by Alexander Rea in 1909, which I have revised \(Figure 5.1 \[but see note 1 below—ed.\]\). The main entrance into the vimana is on the porch’s western end, directly in line with the western, and only, gateway in the enclosing stone prakara wall. On the opposite end of the west-east axis a smaller doorway opens into the vimana’s eastern side. The inside walls of the prakara as well as the outside walls of the vimana, including its porch, are covered with sculpted panels.




FIGURE 5.1. The ground plan of the Vishnu-house. Revised from Rea 1909.




## **The Three Sanctums**

Inside the vimana at its center is the sanctum. Technically, it is a *garbhagriha*, which means “house \(*griha*\) of the embryo \(*garbha*\),” which is the womb. Inside the womb-sanctum sits the black stone icon of Narayana’s formation as Vasudeva. He faces west toward the single doorway. Around the sanctum, but hidden to viewers outside the vimana, runs a path for walking around the sanctum \(*pradakshinapatha*\) to worship the panels sculpted on the sanctum’s exterior sides. They face north, east, and south. A stairway on the south leads from this circumambulatory to the floor above and a stairway on the north leads from that floor to this circumambulatory below.1

On the middle floor of the vimana stands a second sanctum with a small porch. It stands directly above the bottom sanctum and repeats its pattern on a smaller scale. The roof of the long porch below forms a verandah in front of the second-floor porch. Its narrow circumambulatory is outside in the open air. The outer walls of the vimana’s bottom floor extend above the middle floor far enough to provide a low wall completely encircling the middle floor to encompass the sanctum, its porch, and the verandah. As is also the case on bottom floor, this sanctum and porch are covered with sculpted panels, and a black stone icon is placed inside the sanctum. However, this icon reclines rather than sits \(Figure 5.2\).




FIGURE 5.2. Reclining icon in middle-floor sanctum with goddesses Shri and Bhumi. Photo by Hudson, 1989.


The sanctum on the top floor above, which is in line with the two lower sanctums, is smaller still. It omits the porch and has no verandah. No circumambulatory runs around it and no sculpted panels line its outer sides. Access to it was apparently by ladder. The black stone icon that belongs in that sanctum was standing, but is now missing.2 The only image now inside is a variation of the bottom floor’s seated icon, which is sculpted on the back or east wall.

Finally, an enclosed square space with no opening, visible only in the plan of the vimana \(Figures I.2, I.3\), caps the vertical sequence of the three sanctums. It never contained an icon and is not accessible. Possibly that hidden cube serves only an architectural function, but I think it more likely that as a hidden fourth above the three sanctums it has a theological meaning.

If we collapse the three sanctums onto a single plane and place the hidden cube in the center, a mandala emerges \(Figure 5.3\). In the discussion that follows, I will argue that the meaning of these three sanctums, and the enclosed cube at the top, is the following. The sitting, reclining, and standing icons depict Narayana as Supreme Vasudeva \(*paravasudeva*\) in three stages of self-transformation. The squared space at the top of the vimana, and the center of the mandala, signifies Supreme Vasudeva as the dimension of God that cannot be seen. This cubed space cannot be reached, it is hidden, and it is empty of a form, characteristics of the mode of consciousness known as “extinction in *brahman*” \(*brahmanirvana*\), which, according to the *Bhagavata Purana*, is extinction into God. When the devotee thinks entirely of Narayana, the narrator Shuka says, he or she enters “the supreme *brahman*, which is subtle but not empty \(*ashunya*\), though some think it empty \(*shunya*\); and that nonempty *brahman* is the Bhagavan Vasudeva” \(*BP* 9.9.49\). But the nonempty *brahman*, which is Supreme Vasudeva, cannot be visualized with form.




FIGURE 5.3. Mandala of three sanctums on a single plane. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.


The three sanctums beneath that hidden cube in the vimana, and enclosing it in the mandala, are esoteric depictions of the process by which Supreme Vasudeva transforms himself “internally.” Each transformation is more “dense,” “manifest,” or “gross” than the one that produces it. The densest manifestation is represented by the upper sanctum housing the standing Krishna, and in the mandala by the square immediately enclosing the cube. The least dense manifestation is represented by the lower sanctum housing the sitting icon, and in the mandala by the outside square. The middle sanctum housing the reclining icon mediates between the two extremes, and in the mandala it is represented by the square immediately inside the outermost square. According to this interpretation, the hidden cube at the top represents Supreme Vasudeva as the Self \(*atman*\) present within Krishna standing inside the densest of God’s transformations in the top sanctum.



## ******The Bottom-floor Sanctum: God’s Vyuha Formations**

The bottom sanctum hidden within the vimana defines this mandala’s richly complex set of meanings. It does so by four depictions of Vasudeva. One is the black stone image sitting inside the sanctum; the other three sit as bas-relief sculptures on the three exterior sides of the sanctum’s walls. Each of these four depictions represents a specific formation or vyuha, and each faces a specific direction. The Bhagavan makes these four formations within His self, and by this means turns His self into the universe. Figure 5.4 illustrates this concept.




FIGURE 5.4. The four vyuha formations facing their respective directions. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.


The process of Narayana’s bodily transformation follows the concept of the human person described in chapter 2, but inverts it. Whereas the human body has the grossest or densest mode of matter as the outer sheath or person, and the finest mode of matter as the innermost sheath or person, God’s body has the grossest mode of matter at its center and the finest mode as its enclosing sheath. This doctrine of God’s vyuhas is taught by the *Pancharatra Agama*. As we discussed in chapter 2, the word *vyuha* is here translated as “formation,” like the formation of an army. But whereas an army rearranges its component warriors at the order of its strategists, God rearranges His consciousness through the creative power of His unified knowledge known as yogamaya, or simply maya. Nevertheless, just as all of an army’s possible formations are fully present in each specific formation it makes, so God’s formations are fully present in each specific formation He makes.

According to this Pancharatra doctrine, the formation called Vasudeva is primary; it resembles the entire army assembled on the battlefield, for example the Pandava and Kaurava armies assembled on the Kuru Field on the first day of the Great War. The first formation Vasudeva makes for strategic purposes is called the Plower \(Samkarshana\); on the mandala the Plower formation faces north. This Plower formation then becomes the formation called the Preeminently Mighty \(Pradyumna\); on the mandala the Pre-eminently Mighty formation faces east. The Pre-eminently Mighty formation then becomes the formation called the Unobstructed \(Aniruddha\); on the mandala the Unobstructed formation faces south. Vasudeva makes these three formations for strategic purposes. We shall discuss them in detail.

Vasudeva’s transformation of his self into a material body begins with the bottom-floor sanctum. The icon sitting here depicts Vasudeva as formation \(*vasudeva-vyuha*\), the purest mode of Narayana that humans can perceive \(Figure 5.5\). Vasudeva here corresponds to the *brahma-atman* about which Yajnavalkya teaches King Janaka in the *Brihadaranyaka Upanishad* \(*BU* 4.4\).3 This *brahman* without a body \(*asharira*\) is undying life-breath \(*prana*\) that is nothing but tejas. He is “the breathing behind breathing, the sight behind sight, the hearing behind hearing, the thinking behind thinking.,, He is the atman, who in one’s life-breath is perception \(*vijnana*\) made of maya, and in the space \(*akasha*\) within one’s heart \(*hridaya*\) is the overlord of all \(*sarvasyaadhipati*\), the ruler of everything \(*sarva-ishvara*\) unaffected by good or by bad action \(*sadhu-asadhu-karma*\). He cannot be grasped \(*agrahya*\). He is the *brahman* world \(*brahma-loka*\) of supreme joy \(*parama ananda*\), “the immense and unborn self \(*atman*\), the eater of food and the giver of wealth, the unaging, undying, immortal *brahman* free of fear.”




FIGURE 5.5. Vaikuntha Perumal: The vyuha Vasudeva facing west. From Rea 1909.


The icon inside the sanctum depicts this *brahman-atman* as Ruler, but the three formations on the sanctum enclosing it depict the causal \(*karana*\) dimension of the subtle body \(*sukshmasharira*\) the Ruler creates for himself. But “cause” \(*karana*\) in God’s case has nothing to do with karma or necessity, as it does in the case of all other beings. In God’s case the cause is his delight in play \(*vinoda, BP* 10.2.39\).

This causal body produces the remainder of God’s subtle body \(*sukshmasharira*\), which the sanctum above and its reclining icon represent. That sanctum in turn produces God’s gross body \(*sthulasharira*\), which is represented by the sanctum above it with its now-missing standing icon. It, of course, is the universe in which we exist. Finally, the enclosed cube hidden above that top sanctum represents the Supreme Vasudeva who pervades all his bodies or sheaths but cannot be seen. Nevertheless, Parama Vasudeva uses his own creative power \(*atmamaya*\) to become the man Krishna living in his own gross body of spacetime \(*BP* 9.24.57\).

Viewed from the outside, the vimana intentionally looks like a mountain, and one does indeed walk up it as if walking up a mountain. Yet, viewed from inside, that upward journey is also inward: as the viewer climbs to the top of the Vishnu-house he or she walks inward toward its center.

According to this secret or esoteric perspective, the bottom sanctum is understood to enclose the middle sanctum, the middle sanctum to enclose the top sanctum, and the top sanctum to enclose the hidden cube. When these four levels are conceptually collapsed onto the same plane, they form the esoteric mandala illustrated above. In thus mapping, one walks from the bottom sanctum inward to the middle sanctum, from there inward to the top sanctum, and there one gazes on the empty cube at the center. In the terms of God’s body, one begins at the outer edge of the mandala with the causal dimension. One moves inward to the rest of the subtle dimension, and from there to the dimension of the gross body, and there one finds God’s essential Self \(*atman*\), the point from which the entire mandala emerges.

Significantly, when we view this mandala in terms of the three icons and the hidden cube, the sitting icon encloses the reclining icon, the reclining icon encloses the standing icon, and it encloses the empty cube. The standing icon is Krishna as lover and hero; the cube at its center illustrates the Bhagavata teaching that, unlike other avatars, Krishna is Narayana’s complete embodiment. As the Bhagavata poet Goda \(Antal\) says in the first stanza of her Tamil poem *Tiruppavai:*


The son of Nanda the cowherd,

whose spear is sharp

and deeds ruthless,

The young lion of Yashoda,

whose eyes are full

of beauty,

He whose body is dark as a cloud,

with red eyes

and a face like

the sun and moon,

Is Narayana himself….4


The cube at the center thus represents Narayana’s essential Self within the standing Krishna to illustrate a fundamental Bhagavata doctrine: Narayana uses his maya to create Krishna as a unique human being who embodies on earth his six glorious excellences \(*bhaga*\) in their fullness.



## **The Vasudeva Formation Enthroned in the Bottom-Floor Sanctum**

Kalikanri begins his poem about the Emperor’s Vishnu-house by describing the enthroned icon in the bottom sanctum as the source of the causal body: “The Speaker is the substance / Of the words He speaks, / Is Taste, Touch, Speech, Smell, and Sight, / Is auspicious Hara, / Is Naranan, / Is Brahma with four faces / And Kacci, beautiful in the rich expanse / Of her realm, is His place, // There where its many subjects shout / “The Ruler of Pallavas\!” / “The Ruler of Cheras\!” / And numerous kings prostrate / To the victory anklet of this / Pallava Lord of noble Mallas / Who built the Emperor’s Vishnu-house / To be His home” \(*PT* 2.9.1\).

In the stanza’s first half, Kalikanri describes the Vasudeva formation as we find him today, a large black stone king facing west with eyes wide open. His left leg is pendent and his right leg is drawn up onto the throne, its foot resting on his left thigh in a relaxed posture \(*lalitasana*\) \(Saunders 1985:127\). His back right hand holds the wheel \(*chakra*\), and his back left the conch \(*shankha*\). The front right hand holds the mudra gesture of “fear not” \(*abhaya*\), and the front left hand the mudra gesture of “giving boons” \(*varada*\). For daily worship, the icon is dressed, crowned, and garlanded. The photograph in Figure 5.6 shows gold plates covering portions of Vaikuntha Perumal’s black stone body. His cloth *veshti* or dhoti hides His lalitasana posture. Shakti in her two forms as Goddess Shri and Goddess Bhumi is not present as separate stone icons. For liturgical services, smaller moveable icons of the Bhagavan with the separate goddesses are placed in front on an altar so they articulate the dimensions implied by the black icon sitting alone. This large black icon fills the sanctum; room is left only for the small moveable metal icons in front, and for the priest serving during worship.




FIGURE 5.6. The vyuha Vasudeva facing west. From Ramesh 1993.


This icon embodies the Vasudeva formation, whose six glorious excellences are contained in a body we perceive as black. They emerge into action when their possessor makes the three strategic formations that appear as sculpted panels on the outside surface of the sanctum’s north-facing, east-facing, and south-facing sides, each enthroned in a similar manner. In clockwise sequence, they are entitled “Plower” \(Samkarsana\), “Pre-eminently Mighty” \(Pradyumna\), and “Unobstructed” \(Aniruddha\).

The sanctum defines an outside and an inside, which inevitably obscure the doctrine it illustrates. The formations we see facing outward toward the cardinal directions on its surface theologically take place “inside” Shakti, whom the sanctum itself embodies as causal matter. The bottom-floor sanctum denotes Narayana’s darkened “center” where directional space has not yet appeared. Vasudeva’s self-transformation into a complete subtle body, and then into the body of directional space and chronological time takes place “inside” this darkened “center.” Our ever-moving universe \(*jagad*\) thus exists within the boundaries of God’s invisible body, just as the wind exists within the invisible boundaries of space \(*akasha*\). As Krishna explains to Arjuna: “All this moving universe is pervaded by me with an unmanifest form: all beings stand in me, and I do not stand in them. \[Yet\] beings do not stand in me, behold my unified sovereign consciousness \(*yoga aishvara*\): supporting beings and \[yet\] not standing in beings, my Self is the origin of beings. Just as the great wind stands in space and \[yet\] moves always and everywhere, so all beings stand in me; thus you should understand it” \(*BG* 9.4–6\).

In order to illustrate this transformation “inside” God, the sanctum depicts it as a center extending outward in the cardinal directions. The result is an image of God with four faces, each turned toward a cardinal direction. Krishna also explains this to Arjuna:

I will tell you that which should be known: once a man knows it, he attains to immortality. The highest *brahman* \(*parambrahma*\) It is called—beginningless—It is not being nor is It not-being. Hands and feet It has on every side, on every side eyes, heads, mouths, and ears; in the world all things encompassing \[changeless\] It abides. Devoid of all the senses, It yet sheds light on all their qualities, \[from all\] detached, and yet supporting all; free from Nature’s constituents, It yet experiences them. Within all beings, yet without them; unmoved, It yet moves indeed; so subtle is It you cannot comprehend It; far off It stands, and yet how near It is\! Light of lights, “Beyond the Darkness” It is called: \[true\] knowledge, what should be known, accessible to knowledge, established in the heart of all. \(*BG* 13.12–17\)

The dimension of God Krishna calls supreme *brahman* \(*parambrahma*\) is Vasudeva. The dimension we shall later meet as great *brahman* \(*mahadbrahma*\) is Shakti, the Goddess \(*BG* 14.3\). Supreme *brahman* resides at the center of our own consciousness as the Self \(*atman*\). Great *brahman*, the Goddess, resides with us as our material bodies, enveloping and hiding the Self. Moreover, supreme *brahman* sits as the black stone icon in great *brahman* as the sanctum and the vimana as his material bodies. Macrocosm and microcosm thus converge in a single Vishnu-house, which functions, in Robert I. Levy’s terms, as a “mesocosm.”5



## **The Circumambulatory**

Vasudeva’s sequence of internal formations unfolds clockwise from the right side \(*pradakshina*\) of the seated stone icon. Each formation is sculpted as enthroned, with deva Brahma to his right and deva Shiva to his left; their smaller size and subordinate place denote their dependence on the Bhagavan in the middle. These vyuha panels are not under worship today and are badly damaged, but continue to reveal the sequence in which Vasudeva’s Light blazes forth to emanate spacetime. Counterclockwise \(*prasavya*\) they reveal the sequence Vasudeva follows to resorb spacetime into the primordial unity of his hidden consciousness.6 In either direction, the sequence ends at the complete Vasudeva formation seated inside the sanctum facing west. Figure 5.7 illustrates the following discussion.




FIGURE 5.7. Diagram of the bottom-floor sanctum and porch. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.


A doorway at Vasudeva’s right opens into the completely enclosed cirumambulatory.7 Walking clockwise, the wall to the viewers’ right is the outer surface of the sanctum, the wall to the left is the inside of the enclosing vimana wall. Today there are no other images and no paintings in the passageway. Two narrow windows in the vimana wall provide daylight for viewers on each of the sanctum’s sides. A larger opening in the vimana wall directly opposite each vyuha depiction allows the figure to gaze outward into the world, shining forth like flame inside a lantern.



### ***The Plower Formation Facing North***

The badly damaged sculpture portrays the white Plower, pleasantly inebriated, sitting in a royal pose of sensual ease on a flat throne, as shown in the 1909 drawing \(Figure 5.8\). His left leg is pendent and his right leg rests on the throne. Five cobras with expanded hoods rise behind his head and crown. Standing on a level below the throne is Brahma with multiple heads to his right and Shiva to his left. Other unidentified figures appear to be seated below his feet.




FIGURE 5.8. Samkarshana, the Plower formation, facing north. From Rea 1909.


This north-facing Plower formation represents the first pair of Vasudeva’s glorious excellences \(*bhaga*\): omniscient knowledge \(*jnana*\) and its indefatigable transformative power \(*bala*\) \(Gupta 1989: 224–228\). Samkarshana the Snake is portrayed here as the self-deluded omniscience on which everything is based. He is called Endless \(*ananta*\). He begins the sequence of formations as “First to Escape,” and after everything dissolves he is the “Primordial Remainder.” His title Adishesha captures both meanings. Krishna explains this to Arjuna: “All beings, O \[Arjuna\] son of Kunti, pour into the \[feminine\] matter \(*prakriti*\) that belongs to me at the end of a great cycle \(*kalpa*\), and again I emit them at the beginning of a great cycle. Grasping my own matter, I emit again and again this whole unsubmissive collection of beings through the will of matter” \(*BG* 9.7–8\).

Samkarsana means “drawing together,” “contracting,” “attracting,” and “plowing.” It connotes an attractive and powerful plowman with sexual meaning: The plowman is the “knower of the field” and is male, while the “field” he knows and plows is female. As Krishna tells Arjuna, this plowman knows how to plow the field fruitfully: “And know me as the field-knower in all fields, \[Arjuna\] son of Bharata; whatever knowledge there is of the field and the field-knower that knowledge is my doctrine…. \(*BG* 13.2\). My womb is great *brahman* \(*mahadbrahma*\), I plant the embryo in it; the arising of all existing things comes from that, \[Arjuna\] son of Bharata. In all wombs, \[Arjuna\] son of Kunti, whatever forms arise, *brahman* is their transcendent womb, I am the father who plants the seed” \(*BG* 14.3–4\).

This endless process, however, depends upon misperception \(*avidya*\); God has to see double, as it were. Using the royal court as a metaphor, the Queen offers the King liquor, which clouds his mind, loosens his self-control, and allows her to arouse him and to seduce him. The universe of differing entities thus comes into being, one might say, when a dimension within the One gets inebriated enough to see double, couples with itself, and becomes pregnant. But this is the union of consciousness with the primordial substratum of matter \(*pradhana*\) and has the nature of a dream, or of an imagined scene, or of a thought. The fetus produced exists only so long as the dreamer’s imagination or thought continues \(*BP* 11.13.30–34\). In other words, our universe conceived within God exists only as long as God thinks it.

When Krishna and his kinsmen depict Vasudeva’s formations in the Krishna Story \(*Krishnakatha*\) found mostly in book ten of the *Bhagavata Purana*, the Vasudeva formation appears as Krishna, and the Plower appears as his elder brother. He is named Balarama, “the pleasing \(*rama*\) power of omniscience \(*bala*\),” and also Baladeva, “God as the power of omniscience.” His white skin denotes jnana’s purity \(*sattva*\). In early Bhagavata sculpture, Balarama is often hooded by snake heads, carries a plow \(*hala*\), and holds a cup of the liquor he enjoys \(D. M. Srinivasan 1989\). The snake signifies omniscience \(*jnana*\) as the one who knows the field; the liquor signifies this knower’s voluntary self-delusion; and the plow signifies his planting the embryo in the field.

The plow is also Balarama’s weapon. He uses it to snag demons, to divert the Yamuna River, and to pull the Kuru capital of Hastinapura into the Ganga River \(*BP* 10.65; 68; 78.17–40; 79\). In order to pound opponents into submission, he also uses a pestle or club \(*musala*\). By pre-Gupta times, Samkarshana Balarama was a model for some type of ascetic practice. According to Kautilya’s *Arthashastra* of about the fourth to second centuries BCE, his ascetic worshipers had shaved heads or braided hair, and were well enough known that spies would use their guise as a disguise \(Chakraborti 1973: 167; Rangarajan 1992: 20\).



### ***The Pre-eminently Mighty Formation Facing East***

From the Plower viewers walk to the end of the passageway, turn right past the exit of the stairway leading from the floor above, and encounter the Pre-eminently Mighty formation. He sits in the middle of the sanctum wall facing east. The only significant difference in position between this vyuha sculpture and the other two is that it faces toward a door rather than a window. The door is the east entrance into the vimana allowing access to the stairs leading to the floor above.

As befits the bhaga of sovereignty, the Pre-eminently Mighty has a more formal royal posture than the inebriated Plower. He sits on a flat throne and his pendent left leg rests on a footstool \(Figure 5.9\). Two broken hands appear to have held mudra gestures, and the back pair of arms holds the wheel and conch. Brahma stands to his right, holding the anjali posture, as does Shiva standing to his left. Three unidentified smaller figures stand in between.




FIGURE 5.9. Pradyumna, the Pre-eminently Mighty formation, facing east. From Rea 1909.


The Pre-eminently Mighty manifests the Bhagavan’s second pair of glorious excellences: sovereignty \(*aishvarya*\) and the heroic ability to be unaffected by any change he brings about \(*virya*\). He is Vasudeva’s passion \(*rajas*\) that motivates and entangles all beings, yet does not entangle him. In the *Bhagavad-gita*, Krishna tells Arjuna that the primeval Person from whom all generative action flows \(*BG* 15.4\) is the source of passion that gives rise to desire and anger \(*BG* 3.37\)—to the form of desire difficult to conquer \(*BG* 3.43\)—but is untouched by the impulse \(*BG* 7.11–14\). According to the metaphor of the royal court, the King sits indifferently among his works, looking on and supervising the actions of the Queen. Yet the King and Queen mysteriously occupy the same body. Krishna reveals this “royal secret” to Arjuna when he describes himself sitting enthroned while he brings forth all the worlds inside his material womb: “And these acts of mine do not bind me, O Prize Winner, as one indifferent I sit among these acts unentangled. While I watch and preside, matter sets in motion \[things\] moveable and immoveable; by this means, O \[Arjuna\] son of Kunti, the moving universe revolves” \(*BG* 9:9–10\).

The sculpture portrays the Pre-eminently Mighty as obviously pregnant, with broad hips and a prominent abdomen \[which do not appear in Rea’s drawing—ed.\]. The pregnant male is an ancient theme in Indian sculpture \(D. M. Srinivasan 1994\), and expresses the meaning of this formation. The Preeminently Mighty’s pregnancy here derives from the Plower’s coupling on the side facing north. The embryo planted there exists here at God’s uterine center as the universe of spacetime, which the Pre-eminently Mighty impels as he watches with an unblinking gaze. In another context, Krishna uses the planting of the seed of an asvattha tree to describe this idea. He tells Arjuna about the “field knower” and the “field” \(*BG* 13.1–13\), then tells him that he is the one who plants the seed in the field or womb \(*BG* 14.1–4\), and then describes the “Tree of Life” that grows from it \(*BG* 15.1–3, see also *BP* 10.2.27\).

The Pre-eminently Mighty faces outward toward the east, the direction of heaven where devas dwell under Indra’s rule. But we should remember that doctrinally he faces inward, for heaven exists at his own “center,” and his passion appears there as Kandarpa, or more familiarly as Kamadeva, “Desire as Deva” \(*BG* 10.28\). Frustrated desire becomes the deva Skanda \(Spurting\). In one telling of Skanda’s story Agni spurts his semen into the Vedic fire, and in another telling the semen is Shiva’s; in both Skanda become the master of deva warlords \(*senapati*\) \(*BG* 10.24\).

In the Krishnakatha, both Kama and Skanda take birth as Krishna’s sons by different mothers. Rukmini gives birth to his son named Pradyumna, and Jambavati gives birth to his son named Samba \(a weapon\).8 The story’s kinship terms thus translate desire and anger into half-brothers. Pradyumna looks exactly like his father and stirs erotic pleasure in his father’s many wives merely through his appearance \(*BP* 10.55.40\). Samba is a powerful fighter whose anger brings about the extinction of Krishna’s Yadava clan and begins the Kali Yuga \(Hudson 1996: 80–83\). Moreover, Samba does this in a story that echoes the idea of the pregnant male illustrated by this vyuha sculpture: he provokes a curse while dressed as a pregnant woman.

His half-brother Pradyumna also continues the theme. He plays the role of a woman in a story that does not appear in the *Bhagavata Purana*, but rather in two Tamil stories of the fifth and sixth centuries, the *Chilappatikaram* by Ilankovatikal and the *Manimekalai* by Chattanar.9 According to the *Chilappatikaram*, during the Indra festival in the Chola port of Puhar, eleven dances are performed. One of them is the petu dance performed by Kama \(Pradyumna\) in the guise of a woman.10 A fuller description of this petu dance appears in the *Manimekalai*, where a street dancer in Puhar enacts it to end a story the *Bhagavata Purana* does tell \(*Manimekalai* 3: 116–125\). According to this story \(*BP* 10.62–63\), Pradyumna’s son named Aniruddha looks very much like his paternal grandfather, Krishna. Usha, the daughter of the asura Bana, has seen him only in a dream, but has him brought secretly to Sonapura, where he slips past Shiva, who guards Bana’s palace, and enters her apartments to become her lover. Usha’s father Bana is the eldest son of the asura king Bali, who rules in the underworld realm of Sutala, where the Bhagavan as Dwarf guards his palace. Bana is Shiva’s devotee and has a thousand arms; he uses them to drum when Shiva performs his dynamic tandava dances. This pleases Shiva, so he stands guard at Bana’s capital of Sonapura.

When Usha becomes pregnant their affair is revealed. Her outraged father puts Aniruddha in prison. Pradyumna and Krishna come to the rescue and besiege Sonapura. Krishna fights Shiva and chops off all but four of Bana’s thousand arms, but he agrees to Shiva’s submissive request to spare his devotee’s life. This is where the *Bhagavata Purana’s* telling of the story ends. But the Tamil telling continues the story. It says that Pradyumna dances a victory dance \(*puranataka*\) at Bana’s capital as a man with the predominant characteristics of a woman \(*peti*\). We may imagine that Pradyumna has Shiva in mind while he dances victoriously as a woman, for when Pradyumna was Kamadeva in heaven, Shiva burned him up. Now, however, he has mastered Shiva.

Praydumna’s dance must remind Shiva of the dance he performed after he had destroyed the Three Cities \(*tripura*\). He first smeared himself with white ashes \(*pantaranka*\) and then assumed the guise of a fierce form of the Goddess known as Bhairavi \(Zvelebil 1985: 45\). But here at Sonapura, where passion has fulfilled itself in Usha’s pregnancy, the defeated Shiva watches Pradyumna dance in a woman’s guise to proclaim his supremacy over the Destroyer of Three Cities \(*tripurantaka*\). Pradyumna’s dance thus proclaims his sovereignty over passion, and over the burning knowledge by which Shiva turns desire to ashes.

These two victory dances are statements of Bhagavata theology. Each replicates Narayana as the Ancient Couple, as the primordial Supreme Person with the primordial supreme Goddess. The metaphor guiding this theology is a king with his primary queen. The Supreme Person is the king; the Goddess is his queen. The queen is the king’s shri or majesty; it is she that makes him king. Majesty is the source of the king’s realm and of the subjects in it; and she is the source of the conquering power that protects it.

When Bhagavata theology thinks of God in these terms, it speaks in Tamil of Tirumal, of “Great Being \(*mal*\) with Majesty \(*tiru*\)” or “Majesty \(*tiru*\) with Vishnu \(*mal*\).” In Sanskrit it speaks of Shridhara, “the Bearer \(*dhara*\) of Majesty \(*shri*\),” and of Shrinivasan, “the Abode \(*nivasa*\) of Majesty.” According to this theology, Goddess Shri produces the universe as the king’s realm by becoming Goddess Bhumi. Whenever the universe or realm needs protection, Goddess Shri becomes Goddess Chandika Durga. She does this through the shakti or potency that God embodies in the form of Madhusudana, “Destroyer of Deluded Passion.” When Madhusudana’s shakti or potency is “awakened,” it produces tejas in the mode of Goddess Chandika Durga. Goddess Chandika Durga thus embodies God’s brilliant conquering power; and in its “angry” or most intense form, this tejas emerges from her forehead as Goddess Kali.

Let us now return to the dances and apply this theology. When Pradyumna and Shiva dance in the guise of women, they may be understood as imitating the male Madhusudana as shakti or potency. Their female guise imitates the tejas or brilliant conquering power, which makes them successful warriors. As these males dance, they replicate the primordial Ancient Couple in its mode as Madhusudana, the Destroyer of Deluded Passion, which combines male potency \(*shakti*\) with female conquering power \(*tejas*\).

This brings us to the third and final formation. Moving southward, viewers turn right into the south-side passageway and to the Unobstructed formation.



## *******The Unobstructed Formation Facing South***

The Unobstructed panel is badly damaged on the bottom, but closely resembles the royal pose of the Pre-eminently Mighty, without the broad hips and pregnant abdomen \(Figure 5.10\). Two figures on either side may depict Hanuman, the monkey devotee of Rama, and Garuda, the kite bird serving Vasudeva as vehicle \(*vahana*\). Shiva at his left is ruined, but Brahma’s three visible heads are intact at his right.




FIGURE 5.10. Aniruddha, the Unobstructed formation, facing south. From Rea 1909.


The Unobstructed manifests Vasudeva’s third pair of glorious excellences: potency \(*shakti*\) and brilliant conquering power that is sufficient in itself \(*tejas*\). Mantras embody this potency. When mantras are employed properly, they effect a brilliant conquering power that overcomes all obstacles to the possession of prosperous longevity depicted as a drink called amrita or “non-death.” Ideally, the long and prosperous life amrita bestows will lead one toward emancipation from life altogether.

Krishna tells Arjuna that the triple gate of purgatory is desire \(*kama*\), anger \(*krodha*\), and greed \(*lobha*\). This gate, he say, must be left behind if anyone is to move to the highest goal \(*BG* 16.21–22\). Desire, anger, and greed characterize the night-stalking demons \(*rakshasa*\) who attack humans from the south, for example Ravana in Valmiki’s *Ramayana*. The path of rites that lead out of that triple gate, Krishna also says, is found in the system \(*shastra*\) which teaches that he is the supreme Vasudeva and whose instructions \(*vidhi*\) guide ritual actions \(*karma*\) \(*BG* 16.23–24\). The system is the Pancharatra Agama’s teaching about rites performed for practical goals called prayoga. Prayoga rites are the means by which Krishna’s devotee keeps possession of amrita.

But not everyone believes that Krishna is the supreme Vasudeva, and these nonbelievers, Krishna says, belong to the shadowy and delusive side that faces south toward demons and death: “Not knowing me in the human form that I have assumed, stupid people disregard my supreme existence as the great Ruler of Beings. Of useless hope, of useless acts, of useless knowledge, without discrimination, they cling to rakshasa and asura matter, who is the Deluding Female \(Mohini\). But people great in their self, Son of Pritha, seek refuge in deva matter, adoring \[me\] with a mind focused nowhere else, knowing the imperishable origin of all beings” \(*BG* 9.11–13\).

As if to illustrate this passage, Mohini the Deluding Female appears at the southwest corner of the vimana wall enclosing this side of the sanctum \(see below, Figure 15.2\). Placed at the location of disintegration \(*nirriti*\) and sunset, the courtesan faces south while she feeds amrita to devas as asuras watch. Mohini is the female guise that the Unobstructed as Pervading Actor \(*vishnu*\) assumes to manipulate asura lust on behalf of devas. Mohini is the Unobstructed’s version of Pradyumna’s and Shiva’s guises as dancing women. She embodies the potency \(*shakti*\) of prayoga rites to feed amrita’s prosperous longevity to people purified of desire, anger, and greed. The purification process is the subject of the “Path of the Southern Doctrine” illustrated on the sanctum above by its south-facing panels. We shall discuss it in chapter 10.

Given the meanings of the all-inclusive Vasudeva formation, and of the three formations within him, it is likely that the body of each of those three had originally been painted with the color that signifies one of the three threads of matter from which everything is woven. The Plower would have been white \(*shukla*\) to signify the lucid sattva thread that dominates omniscience when it is embodied. The Pre-eminently Mighty would have been red \(*rakta*\) to signify the rajas thread that dominates on behalf of passion. The Unobstructed would have been dark blue \(*shyama*\) to signify the tamas thread that obscures the others to produce ignorance.

The colors of Vasudeva’s various bodies have nothing to do with his innate color, of course. He is best thought of as Light. A shramana son of Rishabha, one of Vasudeva’s avatars whom we shall meet later, explains that the color of Vasudeva’s body is determined by the degree of passion in the consciousness of those who perceive him \(*BP* 11.5.20–34\). They see him as fair in the Krita Yuga and worship him with ascetic self-control \(*tapas*\) and discipline of the mind \(*sama*\) and body \(*dama*\). They see him as red in the Treta Yuga and worship him with the fire sacrifices of the three Vedas. They see him as dark blue in the Dvapara Yuga and worship him with rites of Veda together with Tantra, and use the Pancharatra mantra, “Veneration to You, Vasudeva, veneration to Samkarshana, and veneration to the Bhagavans Pradyumna and Aniruddha.” Finally, in the Kali Yuga they see him as black \(*krishna*\), like an alluring sapphire, and they worship him with various rites of Tantra centered on singing and chanting in sankirtana.

All four of these types of worship have been employed for millennia in the Kali Yuga, which means that this teaching encodes a complex view of time. Just as Vasudeva is present in all his formations, and just as each formation is hidden in the others, so each age or yuga is present in a hidden manner in all the ages. Even in this age dominated by the deluding Kali, the Krita Yuga’s purity is present and in some cases may be recovered. Most devotees in this Kali Yuga follow rites of Tantra or Agama, which include singing bhajans, reciting the Bhagavan’s thousand names, and listening to the stories of Krishna, Rama, and others. But there are some who practice tapas, sama, and dama, there are others who maintain the rites of the fire sacrifice, and there are others still who practice the mixture of Veda and Tantra taught by Agama. In this manner, Krita’s purity, Treta’s passion, and Dvapara’s darkness are present within Kali’s overwhelming blackness. As a result, God is perceived differently, and widely varied accounts of God are reported over time, but they all may be true.

Viewers leave the Unobstructed walking westward. They turn north and exit to their starting place at the doorway leading to the seated Vasudeva. He, of course, contains all three formations, and all three pairs of bhagas within himself, their white, red, and dark blue bodies concealed by his stunning blackness. Kalikanri says in the second stanza of his poem that the universe produced by the sequence of formations we have just examined exists inside this sitting Vasudeva in an open lotus blossom at the region of his navel. He is therefore is known as Padmanabha, “he has a lotus \(*padma*\) at his navel \(*nabha*\)”: “The vast Sky forever black, / The Lights of Sun and Moon, / The Earth and her Mountains / All continue at the navel / Of Kannan with the Lotus Eyes, / Whose place is splendid Kacci / With her tall surrounding walls, // Where the Owner of the / Hard Stone and strong Bow / that scorched the valor / of the Southern King / steady in chariots / during a battle / on enemy ground / Continues as Pallava Sovereign / Here on earth where he built / The Emperor’s Vishnu-house” \(*PT* 2.9.2\).

In order to see the realm where the lotus blossoms, viewers walk up the stairs to the middle-floor sanctum. They climb upward, but from the esoteric point of view they walk inward. Following the analogy of the human person discussed in chapter 2, they move from the “causal” dimension of God’s body represented by the bottom sanctum into the remaining dimensions of his “subtle body” represented by the middle sanctum. These two sanctums, we might say, represent God’s soul \(*jiva*\).

But before we turn to the middle-floor sanctum, let us return to the mandala and to the meanings these four vyuha formations give it. Their fundamentals appear in the ancient Vedic fire sacrifice, yajna, but Bhagavata Dharma builds a richly detailed edifice on this foundation. We shall begin examining the mandala as a map of directional space, and then as a map of chronological time.



## **The Mandala’s Two Axes of Directional Space**

Bhagavata Dharma teaches that space, or akasha, can be with directions and without directions. Non-directional space is the matrix for the perpetually moving universe of directional space. The two intersecting axes of the mandala define its four cardinal directions: one axis runs from west to east and the other from north to south. A deva at each cardinal direction presides over a specific set of occupants. On the north-south axis, Soma the Moon presides in the north over human life in Bharata on Earth; and Yama in the south presides over the dead in Purgatory \(Naraka\). On the east-west axis, Indra presides in the east over devas in bright Heaven above Earth; and Varuna presides in the west over asuras and nagas in the dark waters beneath Earth called Rasa \(liquid, sap, juice, suggesting the liquor asuras enjoy\). Figure 5.11 illustrates this mandala map of the north-south and west-east axes of directional space. We shall follow custom and discuss these directions clockwise, beginning with human life in the north.




FIGURE 5.11. The two axes: Four cardinal directions and their presiding devas and occupants. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.


NORTH. The Plower formation faces north toward Bharata, the realm of human life, one of the nine regions \(*varsha*\) of the Jambu continent at the center of Goddess Earth, Bhumidevi. Mount Meru stands at Jambu’s center with Bharata to the south. The Himalayas form Bharata’s northern boundary, and the sea of salt water forms the boundaries of its other three sides. With rare exceptions, human life is confined to Bharata. Soma the Moon \(also known as Chandra\) presides there. According to an ancient Vedic story, the devas placed a portion of Soma and its Vedic sacrifice on the moon in case asuras should again take over Earth and steal Veda from them, which would be a disaster for them and for us. This is why the moon is known as Soma. In case this happens, devas will go to the moon and use its reserved soma sacrifice to defeat the asuras and push them back under Earth. Moreover, this portion of the soma sacrifice “sprang” like a hare from Bharata to the moon, where it now appears to us as the shape of a hare when the moon is full. This is why Soma the Moon is also known as Shasin, “He Who Possesses the Hare.”

EAST. The Pre-eminently Mighty formation faces the bright deva realm of Heaven \(*svarga*\) above Earth. Heaven is one of the three worlds of death and birth, and its residents freely interact with the inhabitants of the other two worlds, Earth and the Rasa waters beneath her. Heaven’s upper limit is the pole star called Dhruva, and the upper portion of Mount Meru defines its lower limit. Indra presides in Heaven as the king of devas, but Heaven can also be the residence of asuras when they emerge from Rasa and conquer Indra, as they frequently do. When true order \(*dharma*\) exists, however, devas reside in Heaven, asuras reside in Rasa, and humans reside between them on Bharata.

On the mandala map, Bharata in the north and Heaven in the east meet at the northeast corner. Diagonally opposite to this auspicious corner of sunrise is the inauspicious corner of sunset at the southwest. Both corners appear in *Bhagavata Purana* stories about two sisters depicted on this Vishnu-house. One sister is Aditi \(nonrestraint or expansion\) and the other is Diti \(restraint or constriction\). Both are married to the rishi Kashyapa \(Tortoise\) and have a sister, Sati, who is married to Rudra. Diti’s story will be discussed below. The story of Aditi illustrates the auspicious expansion of this northeast corner and appears on the middle-floor sanctum at Panels 14–16 \(see chapter 9\). When the Bhagavan decides to conquer the asura Bali, He enters through Kashyapa into Aditi’s womb and she gives birth to Vamana, the Dwarf. Then, in the manner of Surya’s light, Vamana expands and in three strides encompasses Earth, Heaven, and the worlds above it. He then receives Bali as a protected devotee, and gives him a residence beneath Earth in Sutala, the “auspicious level” of Rasa. Vamana is present there to protect Bali from the delusion natural to asuras, and from enemies such as Ravana \(*BP* 8.15–23\).

SOUTH. The Unobstructed formation faces the realm of rakshasas on Lanka, where Ravana’s youngest brother Vibhishana now presides under the Bhagavan’s rule. His rule is explained by the story of Dasharatha’s son Rama \(Dasharatha Rama\), most famously told in Valmiki’s *Ramayana*. Yama’s domain of Naraka is to the south of Lanka \(*BP* 5.26\). South is dangerous to human welfare. Rakshasas come from there to prey on humans and disrupt their sacrifices, and Yama sends his emissaries from there to seize those whose time it is to die. But a throw of Krishna’s wheel Sudarshana easily slays rakshasas, and a blast of his conch Panchajanya brings Yama to heel, for Krishna may counter karmic justice however he chooses \(*BP* 10.45.26–50\).

WEST. The Vasudeva formation faces west toward the sea and mountains where, at sunset, asuras emerge from Rasa beneath Earth. Sunlight never penetrates Rasa; light there comes from jewels in the heads of nagas. This is where the asura Bali dwells under Vamana’s protection \(*BP* 8.22.24–36\). Earth sets Rasa’s upper limit; Patala \(the Deepest Part\), which is where Vasuki rules the nagas, sets its lower limit. Beneath Patala is Samkarshana in the form of the snake Ananta, “Infinity,” who holds the entire body of Brahma on one of his many heads \(*BP* 5.24–25\). In Pancharatra rites this endless serpent is visualized as resting on a tortoise sustained by the Bhagavan’s power of support \(*adharashakti*; *AS* 28.18; Rastelli 2005: 127\). This tortoise corresponds to Akupara the Unbounded, the Tortoise of Panel 1 at the southwest corner, whose supporting role beneath Brahma’s body is replicated inside it when Vishnu becomes a tortoise \(*kurma*\) to support Mount Mandara as he uses it to churn the Ocean of Milk \(*BP* 8.7.1–12\).

As noted earlier, the mandala’s southern and western realms converge at the southwest corner, the highly inauspicious corner belonging to Earth in her disintegrating mode as Nirriti \(She Who Is Disorder\). This corner is the hour of sunset, and during this period Rudra and his ghosts—bhutas—roam around like ghouls \(*pishacha*\), showing favor toward no one who offends them. The story of Diti, sister to Aditi and Sati, illustrates the danger of this transition from daytime to nighttime. One day at sunset Kama incites Diti to seduce her rishi husband Kashyapa, even though sexual activity during this hour will offend Rudra and his bhutas or “ghosts.” As a result, two guardians in Vaikuntha named Jaya \(Victory\) and Vijaya \(Conquest\) enter into Kashyapa’s fiery semen and become embryonic asura twins in Diti’s womb. They are born as the terrifying and destructive asura brothers Hiranyakashipu \(Golden Clothes\) and Hiranyaksha \(Golden Eyes\) \(*BP* 3.14–19\). This story appears in Panels 8 and 9 \(chapter 8\), in Panel SP3 \(chapter 12\), and in Panel S5 \(chapter 15\).



### ***The Two Axes and the Two Epics***

When this mapping of directional space is thought of as three-dimensional, it sheds light on two famous epics, the *Ramayana* and the *Mahabharata*. According to this three-dimensional model, the mandala’s north-south axis is horizontal and the west-east axis is vertical. The horizontal north-south axis maps the conflict between human life in Ayodhya \(north\) and rakshasa life in Lanka \(south\), and the *Ramayana* story is about this conflict. According to Bhagavata teachings, late in the Treta Yuga Ravana, king of rakshasas in the south, encroaches on the well-being of humans in the north. This prompts Vasudeva to take birth in Ayodhya as Rama and his three brothers, and prompts Goddess Shri to take birth as Rama’s wife Sita. Rama and his brother Lakshmana go to the south, Rama subdues Ocean \(Samudra\), and they build a bridge to cross the ocean to Lanka. After they slay Ravana and his forces, they retrieve Sita from Ravana’s prison, put Ravana’s younger brother Vibhishana on the throne, and return to Ayodhya in the north. Rama is then consecrated emperor of Bharata and rules righteously for thousands of years. As noted earlier, to this day Vibhishana rules rakshasas as Rama’s righteous devotee \(*BP* 9.10–11\).

In a similar manner, the vertical west-east axis maps the conflict between asuras in dark Rasa beneath Earth \(west\) and devas in bright Heaven above Earth \(east\). Earth thus stands at the junction of their perpetual conflict. The *Mahabharata* tells a story about one such conflict on Bharata. The actors in this case are humans living near the end of the Dvapara Yuga. Duryodhana, his ninety-nine Kaurava brothers, his sister, and other relatives descend from the asuras of darkness; their five Pandava cousins led by Yudhishthira descend from five devas of light. They are in conflict because the “asura” Duryodhana has taken the throne belonging to the “deva” Yudhishthira, and he has banished the five Pandavas together with their common wife Draupadi. In order to restore the “deva” Pandavas to their proper place, Krishna orchestrates the Great War “on the field of true order, the Kuru field” \(*BG* 1.1\). The alignment of the armies on the first of eighteen days of battle reveals the problem the Great War is meant to solve. The “deva” Pandavas muster their armies on the western side of the Kuru field, facing east toward the “asura” Kauravas. The Kauravas muster their armies on the eastern side, facing west toward the “deva” Pandavas. But this arrangement inverts dharma’s true order: the “deva” Pandavas should be in the east, just as devas are in Heaven; and the “asura” Kauravas should be in the west where they emerge from Rasa at sunset. Krishna’s intent is to reestablish the true dharma or righteous order before the Kali Yuga begins; and as the Great War commences he explains this righteous dharma to Arjuna in the famous *Bhagavad-gita*, a highly significant Bhagavata scripture.



## **Chronology and the Mandala**

According to Bhagavata Dharma, the Bhagavan takes the form of Surya the Sun inside Brahma’s body of space and time, and measures out Brahma’s daytime, which is called a kalpa. Surya likewise measures out the lifetimes of all beings existing inside Brahma’s body by means of his cycles of daytime and nighttime. This is chronological time as opposed to eternal Time, kala, which belongs to the nature of God \(*BG* 11\). But beings existing inside space and time, or “spacetime,” live at differing chronological speeds. Above and beneath Earth, for example, devas and asuras live at a chronological speed which, when compared to our lives on Bharata, appears to move very slowly: an entire year for us is merely one day-and-night for them; to us they seem to be “immortal.” Ancestors \(*pitri*\) live at yet another speed: a month for us is merely one day-and-night for them. But all beings are propelled by chronological time according to the pattern established for Brahma: nighttime for sleeping; the last hour of night for waking; sunrise followed by morning, midday, and afternoon for acting; and sunset followed by nighttime for sleeping once again.



### ***The Light of Day, the Darkness of Night***

The mandala’s four sides map this pattern of day-and-night; moreover, it correlates them to the mandala’s spatial meanings. Let us again proceed clockwise and begin on the mandala’s northern side. As we noted above, the northeast and southwest corners of the mandala map respectively represent expansion and sunrise, and disintegration and sunset. The mandala displays the opposition of these two corners. If we draw a straight line from one to the other, two parallel triangles of equal size emerge, each representing one-half of the unit of time known as the day-and-night or ahoratra. The triangle on the east represents the light of day and the triangle on the west represents the darkness of night \(Figure 5.12\).




FIGURE 5.12. Ahoratra: Daytime and nighttime on the mandala. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.


Let us now examine the chronological meanings of the mandala’s four sides, beginning again with the north and proceeding clockwise.

NORTH SIDE. The Plower formation’s knowledge, jnana, and its power, bala, face north into the final hour of night called brahmamuhurta or Brahma’s hour. This is when Brahma, devas and asuras, ancestors and humans wake up for their respective days. Knowledge on this side of the mandala is represented by the mantra consisting of the single syllable *Om*. During this predawn hour, Bhagavatas are to repeat this and other mantras through the repetitive method known as japa; this purifies consciousness in preparation for the approaching daytime. The primary mantra of this side consists of eight syllables, *Om namo narayanaya*, which literally mean “*Om*, veneration to Narayana.” It’s true meanings, however, are secrets only an acharya can properly teach \(as in, for example, the later “Essence of the Threefold Secret,” the *Rahasyatrayasara* by the acharya Vedanta Deshika\).

EAST SIDE. The Pre-eminently Mighty formation’s sovereignty, aishvarya, and its ability to act without entanglement in the fruits of actions, virya, face eastward into morning. On the mandala, morning extends from sunrise at the northeast corner to midday at the southeast corner. During early and late morning people motivated by desire are to offer oblations in the fire and venerate God’s material forms in puja to gain specific results, such as the birth of a son, consecration as a king, or rebirth in Heaven \(*BG* 2.42–44\). Bhagavatas, however, are to perform such rites without seeking any gain except the pleasure of God, who established ritual acts to sustain the moving universe \(*BG* 3.10–26\).

SOUTH SIDE. The Unobstructed formation’s potency, shakti, and its conquering power, tejas, face south into the afternoon and evening. On the mandala this extends from midday at the southeast corner to sunset at the southwest corner. This period of lengthening shadows is for study, and for protective rites called prayoga, “the hurling of missiles”; in this case the missiles are potent mantras deployed like arrows \(*astra*\) against demons and asuras approaching as Surya’s light contracts and darkness envelops all of Bharata.

WEST SIDE. The Bhagavan’s three pairs of bhaga attributes or treasures \(jnana and bala, aishvarya and virya, shakti and tejas\) belong to the Vasudeva formation facing westward into nighttime. This extends from sunset at the southwest corner to night’s final hour at the northwest corner where Brahma awakens. The porch entrance marks midnight. In Nandivarman’s day, Bhagavata devotees came from the west like asuras, entered through the prakara gateway, and found themselves facing the porch and its nighttime darkness. But like the consecrated asuras Bali and Prahlada, they knew this darkness as merely the gateway to the Light of lights waiting to receive his slaves and servants, as if they were already with him in Vaikuntha.



### ***The Mandala and the Four Ages on Bharata***

This brings us to the mandala as a map of the four ages of chronological time on Bharata. According to the cosmology taught in the *Bhagavata Purana* \(3.10; 5.11–13\), all realms on Earth exist in an unchanging mode of chronological time equivalent to the age called the Treta Yuga, with one exception. Only on the Bharata region of the Jambu continent do the four ages of time known as the Chatur Yuga operate. Each Chatur Yuga consists of four ages of unequal length, reckoned and named according to the throw of dice ceremonially played in the Vedic ceremony to engender a king \(*rajasuya*\). The winning throw is four, which is true or perfect \(*satya* or *krita*\). Subsequent throws decline in value, from three \(*treta*\), to two \(*dvapara*\), to the losing throw of one \(*kali*\). The four ages of a Chatur Yuga set are therefore called the Satya or Krita Yuga, the Treta Yuga, the Dvapara Yuga, and the Kali Yuga.

The length of these ages is calculated according to the speed at which time passes during a year of devas and asuras, a year slower than a year of humans on Bharata. Each of these ages is framed by twilights, whose length is calculated in hundreds of years equal in number to the thousands of the age they frame. Consequently, a single Chatur Yuga consists of 12,000 day-and-nights of devas and asuras. In human terms on Bharata this is 4,320,000 years measured by Surya the Sun. \(Further refinements of this system of chronological time will be discussed in the next chapter.\)

The four ages of a Chatur Yuga follow a cycle in which the disintegration of the Kali Yuga leads directly into the perfect integration of the Krita Yuga. Chatur Yugas cycle in sets of 1,000, because this is the length of one of Brahma’s daytimes \(*kalpa*\); his nighttime lasts an equal span of time. A year for Brahma consists of 360 of these sets of 1,000 Chatur Yugas, and Brahma lives 100 of his years. Bhagavata Dharma calculates that Brahma has just begun the second half of his life. We exist in the first daytime of his fifty-first year, during the seventh Manu Term, near its midday. This daytime is known as the Varaha Kalpa, Daytime of Boar. The story that explains this name appears at Panels W6 and S5 \(chapters 11 and 15\).

As we have seen, the mandala of the Vishnu-house devotes each of its four sides to one division of day and night: To the final hour of night on the north, to morning on the east, to afternoon on the south, and to night on the west. And it does the same for the four ages of a Chatur Yuga. God’s sculpted formations gaze from the sanctum into one of these four ages: On the north side the Plower gazes into the human realm, into the last hour of night, and into the Krita Yuga. On the east side the Pre-eminently Mighty gazes into the deva realm, into early and late morning, and into the Treta Yuga. On the south side the Unobstructed gazes into the realm of rakshasas and Yama, into early and late afternoon, and into the Dvapara Yuga. And on the west side the complete Vasudeva gazes into the asura realm, into nighttime, and into the Kali Yuga. The Vishnu-house uses visual details to depict this complex of abstract ideas, and does so generously and with refined sophistication, as we shall see.



### ***The Chronology of Vasudeva’s Twelve Murtis or Interior Formations***

The mandala also encodes the doctrine of Vasudeva’s twelve antarvyuhas or “interior formations,” each composed of His three formations: Plower, Preeminently Mighty, and Unobstructed. These interior formations are called murtis, a term for a material form, and they in turn transform themselves into denser material modes for puja worship. Each interior formation possesses a specific name and they follow a set sequence: 1\) Keshava, 2\) Narayana, 3\) Madhava, 4\) Govinda, 5\) Vishnu, 6\) Madhusudana, 7\) Trivikrama, 8\) Vamana, 9\) Shridhara, 10\) Hrishikesha, 11\) Padmanabha, and 12\) Damodara. All of these names appear in scriptures as names for Vasudeva Krishna, and sculpted panels on the middle floor sanctum represent them \(Figure 5.13\).11




FIGURE 5.13. The six bhagas and the twelve murtis on the middle-floor sanctum and porch. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.


These twelve interior formations also have meanings relating to the twelve months of the year, but the identity of murti and month is not exact. The *Satvata-samhita* prescribes a vow that requires the worship of each murti for a month, yet worship begins not on the first day of a month but on its tenth day, and ends with the tenth day of the following month. For example, the vowed worship of the first murti, Keshava, begins on the tenth day of the bright half of the month Margashirsha, continues through the winter solstice, and ends on the tenth day of the month Pushya, when worship of the murti Narayana begins. The cycle concludes with worship of the twelfth murti Damodara, which ends with the tenth day of Margashirsha. Moreover, the sculpted representations of these murtis and the months they imply are as asymmetrically arranged on the mandala, as are its representations of day and night, and of the solstices and equinoxes. The winter solstice falls at the northeast corner of sunrise and the summer solstice at the southwest corner of sunset—this much is symmetrical. But the vernal equinox falls at the southeast corner and the autumnal equinox falls at the center of the western side—at the place of midnight and of the porch entrances into the sanctums. The mandala clearly does not measure chronological time according to the indifferent ticking of the modern clock’s seconds, minutes, and hours. Instead it measures time according to patterns etched by the light and dark of sun, moon, and stars. These are measurements of approximate duration, each with its own qualities and values, and the true order of dharma regulates human life accordingly.




