+++
title = "63"

+++


63. Rather not, as the text does not declare their going together.

It is not true that the meditations on the Udgītha and the rest are bound to the sacrifices in the same way as the Udgītha, and so on, themselves are; for Scripture does not declare that they go together with, i.e. are subordinate constituents of the Udgītha, and so on. The clause 'Let him meditate on the Udgītha' does not indeed itself state another qualification on the part of the agent (i.e. does not state that the agent in entering on the meditation is prompted by a motive other than the one prompting the sacrifice); but the subsequent clause, ' whatever he does with knowledge, with faith, with the Upanishad, that becomes more vigorous,' intimates that knowledge is the means to render the sacrificial work more efficacious, and from this it follows that the meditation is enjoined as a means towards effecting a result other than the result of the sacrifice. And hence the meditation cannot be viewed as a subordinate member of the Udgītha, which itself is a subordinate member of the sacrifice. It rather has the Udgītha for its basis only. He only indeed who is qualified for the sacrifice is qualified for the meditation, since the latter aims at greater efficaciousness of the sacrifice; but this does not imply that the meditation necessarily goes with the sacrifice. By the greater vigour of the sacrifice is meant its non-obstruction by some other sacrificial work of greater strength, its producing its effect without any delay.--The case of a statement such as 'he whose ladle is of parṇa wood hears no evil sound' is different. There the text does not declare that the quality

of consisting of parṇa wood is the direct means of bringing about the result of no evil sound being heard; hence there is no valid reason why that quality should not be subordinate to the ladle, which itself is subordinate to the sacrifice; and as it is not legitimate to assume for the mere subordinate constituents of a sacrifice special fruits (other than the general fruit of the sacrifice), the declaration as to no evil sound being heard is to be viewed as a mere arthavāda (i.e. a mere additional statement meant further to glorify the result of the sacrifice--of which the ladle made of parṇa wood is a subordinate instrument).

