+++
title = "12 The Panels on the Ardhamandapa or Porch"

+++





The northern and southern sides of the ardhamandapa or porch have the same arrangement.1 The corner panel is visually set apart from the other two. At the center of the wall is a window flanked on each side by a tall covered structure housing a graceful male guard \(depicted at Panel NP3\). The windows have been closed up to allow for later shrines to be built inside. At the bottom of the sealed window on the southern side emerges a drainage channel to carry the flow from the unction rites conducted in the shrine of the Goddess Sri Lakshmi, known in Tamil as Tayar, the Venerable Mother. Her east-facing black stone icon stands in a sanctum built inside the porch adjacent to this south wall. As a later addition, it would have required the closing of the window. Framed by tall pillars with a roofed top, these blank panels share the visual status of the central figures in the two panels on either side.

A sculpted set of three standing male figures is on each side of the guarded window. The central figure defines the identity of the set and is the focus of attention of the other two. The meanings of these panels have to do with the Vedas and its rituals, with the direction the panels face on the Vishnu-house mandala, and with the time of night in which they appear. The three panels facing southward \(placed between Panels W1 and W2\) are in the position of early nighttime. The first two panels represent curses made at a sacrifice, an interrupted sacrifice that leads to disaster, and one that leads to blessings. The third panel represents a curse that leads to purification through constant opposition to God. The three panels facing north \(placed between Panels W4 and W5\) are in the position of late nighttime moving toward the predawn hour of Brahma or brahmamuhurta. The first panel represents preservation of the Vedas for Brahma’s new daytime kalpa. The second two panels represent the affirmation of radical ascetic practices as consistent with the Vedas even as they violate Vedic limitations.



## **The Panels on the Porch Facing South**

These panels are discussed in the clockwise direction, beginning at the corner where the porch and vimana join.



### ***Panel SP1: Hari Flanked by Rudra and Daksha***

THE STORY. This panel represents the long set of stories that begins with Daksha \(Skill in Sacrifice\) during the first Manu Term ruled by Svaymbhuva Manu with his wife Satarupa \(*BP* 4.1–7\). According to the Daksha story, Daksha was a householder son of Brahma, a lord of progeny \(*prajapati*\).2 His sixteenth daughter was named Sati \(True Wife\). He married her to Rudra Shiva.

Once, when the lords of progeny were conducting a great thousand-year sacrifice \(*sattra*\) to Vasudeva, Daksha entered the sacrificial hall. Everyone automatically arose to greet him except his father, Brahma, and his son-in-law, Rudra Shiva. Daksha greeted his father, but was furious at his son-in-law, who showed not the slightest gesture of polite recognition. In his rage he regretted having given his daughter to someone who was not auspicious \(*shiva*\) but inauspicous \(*ashiva*\), because he danced naked in cremation grounds with demons and wore the ashes of cremated bodies and the bones of the dead \(*BP* 4.2.13–16\). Supported by the Brahmins present, Daksha pronounced a curse on Rudra Shiva: “May this most depraved of devas cease to receive any portion of the sacrifice.” Daksha then left the sacrificial arena. Rudra’s servant Nandishvara \(Ruler of the Happy\) countered with a curse on Daksha and the Brahmins who supported him: They shall become ignorant performers of rites, lost in beastly pleasure, and Daksha shall have the head of a goat \(*BP* 4.2.20–26\). The Brahmin seer Bhrigu then countered this curse with a third: Those who follow Rudra by receiving the Shivadiksha and following the Bhavavrata shall be impostor \(*pakhanda*\) worshipers not of Rudra but of the leader of his bhutas or ghosts \(*BP* 4.2.28–31\). Shiva and his followers left the sacrificial arena in a grim mood. But the lords of progeny completed the sattra by taking its final bath at the place where the Ganga joins the Yamuna and went home satisfied.

Father-in-law and son-in-law were antagonistic for many years \(*BP* 4.3\). Brahma had appointed Daksha leader of the lords of progeny, and he grew proud. His conflict with Rudra Shiva came to a head at sacrificial rites during the rule of King Prachinabarhi \(*BP* 4.5.8\). Daksha had patronized the Vajapeya sacrifice and now began the prestigious Brihaspatisava sacrifice. He invited all devas and their wives to it except Rudra Shiva and Sati. Only when Sati saw devas and their elegantly dressed wives traveling to her father’s place did she learn of the event. Though not invited, she nevertheless asked her husband to take her to it so that she could see her sisters and enjoy the festivities. “After all,” she asked, “am I not half your body?”

But Shiva said that because her father had insulted them, they should not go: “When a holy person \(*sadhu*\) shows respect to another he venerates the Supreme Person with the mind and not the person who identifies himself with the body. The pure sattva in each person is called Vasudeva, for in it the Person \(*puman*\) reveals himself. Mentally, I always venerate the Bhagavan Vasudeva in that sattva. I did not venerate your father who ignorantly identifies himself with his body. He insulted me needlessly and I will not go, and it will not be wise for you to go without me. Insult from family leads to the death of those of good repute” \(*BP* 4.3.23–25\). Shiva’s refusal to rise to greet his father-in-law had been his critique of Daksha’s inordinate pride.

Torn between her husband and her paternal family, grieved and angered, Sati left for her father’s place without her husband \(*BP* 4.4\). But Shiva’s attendants followed her, placed her on a bull to carry her, and escorted her in a grand procession to the place of sacrifice. When she arrived, her mother and sisters greeted her, but not her father. When the Goddess learned that her father had designated no portion of the offerings for her husband, her anger blazed. In the very midst of the assembly, Sati \(True Wife\) told her father that she would now abandon the body born of him: “I am ashamed of my relationship to you. You slander him who is auspicious \(*shiva*\) but looks inauspicious \(*ashiva*\), and whose dark-blue throat \(stained by the kalakuta poison\) reveals his compassion toward the world.”

Wearing a yellow garment and taking a sip of water as purification, Sati sat down facing north and entered the Path of Yoga \(*yogapatha*\). Sati began a rite that illustrates the Yoga teaching of the previous panel of the Unbounded. Steady in her posture \(*asana*\), she equalized the breaths prana and apana in the chakra at her navel. Then she raised the breath udana from there to the chakra at her heart \(*hridi*\), steadied it with her intellect \(*buddhi*\), and then raised it to the chakra at her throat. From there she brought it to the chakra between her eyebrows. Now, motivated by anger at her father, she sustained her attention \(*dharana*\) on the fire and wind in her body. She focused on her husband’s feet until she perceived nothing else. When all her impurities finally dissolved, the intensity of her samadhi set her body on fire \(*BP* 4.4.25–27, following Tagare 1976–1979 2: 443\).

The assembled onlookers were horrified that Daksha had allowed his daughter to burn herself alive. Sati’s attendants rose up to slay Daksha, but Bhrigu, the adhvaryu priest, poured oblations into the southern fire and devas called Ribhus appeared. The Ribhus drove Sati’s party away with burning torches.

At Kailasa, the seer Narada told Rudra Shiva what had happened. Biting his lip in anger, Shiva plucked out a lock of his matted hair, stood up, and threw it to the ground \(*BP* 4.5\). Out of that appeared the embodiment of his anger known as Virabhadra \(Distinguished Hero\). In Tapasyananda’s translation \(1980–1982 2: 321\): “His head touched the skies; his body was black like a rain-cloud; he had a thousand arms; his three eyes resembled three suns; he had fierce-looking fangs; his hair was flaming like fire; and he wore a garland of skulls” \(*BP* 4.5.3\). Shiva sent Virabhadra to destroy Daksha’s sacrifice, and he and his troops hit like a storm, scattering the guests everywhere. Virabhadra tied up Daksha, stood on his chest, and tried to cut off his head with a sword, but surprisingly could not even break his skin. Thinking it over, he decided to treat Daksha as the victim for the sacrifice and suffocated him in the Vedic manner. He was now able to cut off Daksha’s head, which he offered into the southern fire. Finally, Virabhadra set the entire sacrificial arena ablaze and returned to Kailasa.

The devas sought help from Brahma. Since they knew in advance what would happen at a sacrifice that excluded Shiva, Brahma and Narayana had not attended it \(*BP* 4.6\). Brahma advised the devas to seek Shiva’s pardon for excluding him from the sacrifice and led them to Mount Kailasa. They found Shiva sitting on darbha grass under a banyan tree, no doubt facing south as a mode of Dakshinamurti \(the South-Facing Material Form\); he was quietly teaching Narada about the eternal *brahman*. The guru Shiva wore ashes and a deer hide, possessed a staff \(*danda*\), had matted hair, and bore the crescent moon on his forehead. Maitreya described his posture carefully: “Having placed the lotus of his \[left\] foot on the ground toward the right, and his \[left\] elbow on his knee, with the garland of beads on its forearm, he sat holding the gesture of teaching \[with his right hand\]. He, the Lord of the Mountain, sat in the enstasy of extinction in *brahman* without recourse to the belt for yoga” \(*BP* 4.6.38–39a\).3

When Shiva saw Brahma approaching, he and all the others arose and prostrated before him. In response, Brahma praised Shiva as the *brahman* who is the Ruler of Shakti and Shiva, as the womb and seed of the moving universe, as the Bhagavan who, through Shiva and Shakti, plays at the emanation, preservation, and dissolution of everything, and as the ordainer of sacrifice through Daksha. \(Brahma’s identification of Shiva with Vasudeva suggests that Brahma, knowing that Shiva’s consciousness was “extinguished in *brahman*,” addressed *brahman* as at that moment embodied in him.\) Brahma then asked Shiva as one whom maya does not infatuate to be compassionate toward those whom she does. “Please complete the sacrifice that Daksha began,” he said, “and make all the participants whole again.”

Agreeing to Brahma’s request, Shiva went with everyone to the sacrificial arena, where he had everything restored \(*BP* 4.7\). To revive Daksha, whose head had been burned up in the southern fire, they took the head of the sacrificial goat and connected it to his body, and with a glance, Shiva brought him to life. Daksha’s first sight through his goat eyes was Shiva, and the vision clarified his mind. Feelings for his dead daughter swamped Daksha as he praised Shiva, and now understood that in order to keep him and other Brahmins disciplined and out of purgatory, Shiva had chastised him as a cowherd prods cattle with a stick. Brahmins, after all, had originated from Shiva’s own face \(*BP* 4.7.14\).

Shiva told Daksha to complete the sacrifice. He did so with a purifying oblation to Vishnu. Bhrigu, the adhvaryu priest, held the oblation in his hand and Daksha, its goat-headed patron, envisioned Vasudeva in his mind. Hari immediately appeared on Garuda. He had eight hands holding his emblems \(conch, discus, mace, lotus, bow, arrow, sword, and shield\), and a white umbrella glowed above him like the moon. The devas prostrated before him and, beginning with Daksha, each praised him who had graciously accepted the offerings. He was, they said, “the Person who at the end of the last kalpa ate the worlds and lay on Shesha in the waters, the Person whom siddhas strive to see at the center of consciousness \(*hridi*\)” \(*BP* 4.7.42\). The Brahmins said he was the sacrifice, the sacrificer, and the sacrificed together. The vidyadharas said he was the embodiment of sacrifice whose body is Veda, who once became Boar and playfully raised Goddess Earth up from watery realm of Taste \(Rasatala\) on his tusk \(as illustrated in Panel S5\).

In response to their praise, Vasudeva identified himself as the supreme cause of the universe who assumes different names for the emanation, preservation, and destruction of everything through maya. Only through ignorance is he, who is One, seen as dual, as Brahma and Shiva. But he who sees the Three \(Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva\) as One attains peace \(a point made visually by the first south-facing panel on the vimana, S1\). After Daksha and the others completed the sacrifice, everyone returned home.

Daksha’s daughter Sati is reborn through the apsaras Mena and the mountain Himavan \(He Possesses Snow\) as Parvati \(The Mountain’s Daughter\). Again she marries Bhava Rudra \(*BP* 4.7.58–59\). Daksha is reborn through the ten sons of King Prachinabarhis \(Eastern Light\), who are known as Prachetas \(The Attentive\) \(BP 4.30–31; 6.4–6\). At the dawn of the sixth Manu Term, Hari gives Asikni to Daksha as wife and ordains propagation according to the “order of sexual union by couples” \(which matches Daksha’s identification with a goat in his previous birth\). Daksha and Asikni have sixty daughters. Seventeen are married to Kashyapa, and of them two are Aditi and Diti. Kashyapa and Aditi give birth to devas; and most notable among them is Vamana the Dwarf, the subject of Panel SP2 ahead. Kashyapa and Diti give birth to asuras; and most notable among them are Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha, who are introduced by Panel SP3.

The story provides a Bhagavata view of two other religions that claimed the authority of Veda. One followed the rites of Veda scrupulously, but misunderstood them. The other followed rites so distorted that they were deceived imposters or heretics \(*pakhanda/pasanda*\). The leaders of the first religion were Brahmin ritualists, probably Mimamsakas, who did not recognize the authority of the esoteric interpretation of Veda taught in the Upanishads. From the Bhagavata point of view, they did not understand *brahman* truly and thought Veda referred only to itself and only produced life in heaven. They were seen as self-interested ritual specialists out for gain who had no sense of the transcendent dimension of the rites to which they were devoted.

The leaders of the other religion observed the vow of Bhava \(*Bhavavrata*\), and Bhagavatas saw them as polluted and stupid because they wore matted hair, ashes, and bones, and drank liquor in a sadhana that followed from Shivadiksha. The deity they worshiped and called Shiva, Bhagavatas said, was not really Shiva, but was a deva of bhutas who posed as Shiva. The true Shiva was a devotee of the Bhagavan and was worshiped according to the Agama of Shaiva Siddhanta. When this temple was built, that Shaiva Siddhanta Agama governed the imperial Rajasimheshvara temple on the west side of Kanchipuram.

Even devotees of the Shaiva Agama in eighth-century Kanchipuram may have regarded those who followed the Vow of Bhava as imposters.4 From their point of view, they followed sadhanas believed to have been revealed by the fierce Bhairava face on the Linga of Five Faces \(Panchamukhalinga\). Not surprisingly, that fierce Bhairava faces south.

THE PANEL. This badly damaged panel portrays Hari standing on raised platform, crowned and dressed royally \(Figure 12.1\). Five of what must have been eight arms are visible. His back right hand holds the wheel at the level of his head as if he is about to throw it as a weapon. The conch on the left appears higher, at the level of his crown. Of his next pair of arms, only the right arm bending upward is visible. The third pair is visible at his middle; he holds his right hand at his side and his left hand at his center, perhaps forming a mudra. His fourth pair of arms is evident only by his left arm and his hand resting on his hip.




FIGURE 12.1. Panel SP1: Hari flanked by Rudra and Daksha \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


Daksha, with only one pair of arms and dressed as a householder, stands on a lower level to Hari’s right, is turned slightly southward toward him, and forms the anjalimudra at his lower chest. His head reveals his identity as Daksha: Close inspection reveals that his “crown” is the horns of a goat, and that his right ear hangs down like a goat’s ear. Rudra with one pair of arms stands to the left of Hari on the same level as Daksha. The badly damaged figure appears to be dressed as an ascetic with a sacred thread hanging from his right shoulder and passing under his left arm. His identity as Rudra is evident from the matted hair, which stands out at the sides of his head.



### ***Panel SP2: Dwarf Crowned as Upendra with Bali and Indra***

THE STORY. This panel continues the story of Daksha \(reborn as the son of the Prachetas\) and his wife Akshini, represented by the previous Panel SP1. Through Daksha’s daughter Aditi and her husband Kashyapa, the Bhagavan takes birth as Vamana the Dwarf; this panel represents the conclusion of his story \(told at Panels 14 and 15 in chapter 9\).

The scene is Bali’s sacrificial arena at Bhrigu’s Shore on the Narmada River and the time is the seventh Manu Term, in which we are living \(*BP* 8.13.1–6; 8.23.18–31\). At Vamana’s request Bali’s acharya, Shukra, completes Bali’s horse sacrifice and Vamana then gives Heaven back to Indra. Brahma, together with other exalted beings, now proclaims Vamana master of the worlds and of the world protectors, who is to be known as Upendra, “Indra’s Younger Brother,” the protector of all devas and all Vedas, of dharma, fame, and wealth, of auspicious vows and ceremonies, and of Heaven. Indra then leads Upendra in the devas’ vehicle to Heaven and everyone else returns to their respective abodes. Great Indra is now ruling in Heaven, but under the protection of his tiny younger brother. If this story is told at ceremonies or formal acts of intent, whether for devas, ancestors, or people, they shall be completed and all defects shall be removed.

THE PANEL. Vamana as Upendra stands stiffly in the center of this set of panels, dressed royally with a tall and straight crown \(Figure 12.2\). He appears to have two pairs of arms, for what may be the remains of a conch appears above his left shoulder. He rests his left hand on his hip, and holds his right hand at his shoulder, but the mudra is obliterated.




FIGURE 12.2. Panel SP2: Dwarf crowned as Upendra with Bali and Indra \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


The figure in the honored position to Upendra’s right provides the clue to interpreting this set. His large crowned head and his bulkiness, which fills the allotted space, identifies him as the great asura king Bali, who now dwells in Sutala beneath Earth in the dark waters of Rasa. His right arm is destroyed. The mudra of his right hand at the side of his torso is also destroyed. The crowned figure in the subordinate position to Upendra’s left is his older brother Indra, who now dwells in bright Heaven above Earth. As do the other two, he faces southward, but turns his head slightly westward toward his younger brother in the central position of honor. This panel points ahead to the next Manu Term, the eighth, for then Bali will become Indra and from there will attain the ultimate goal of Vaikuntha \(*BP* 3.13.12–13\).

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. Dwarf was born from Aditi in the month of Shravana just after sunset, which matches the place of this second panel after the southwest corner of the vimana, where sunset is located. Shravana \(Avani in Tamil\) is the month that corresponds to the early nighttime after sunset and belongs to the Bhagavan’s murti form named Bearer of Kingship \(Shridhara\). That title denotes Dwarf when he approached Bali at the horse sacrifice. As discussed in chapter 9, the Shridhara murti completes a chronological sequence that began with the early afternoon and is illustrated by the murtis of the southern side of the Vishnu-house: Vishnu \(Pervading Actor\), Madhusudana \(Slayer of Deluded Passion\), Trivikrama \(Thrice-Strider\), Vamana \(Dwarf\), and Shridhara \(Bearer of Kingship\). All those murti titles appear in the story of Dwarf and Bali.

With this panel the Kali Yuga is under way. Krishna told Uddhava in the doctrine of *Brahman* that in the Kali Yuga, adherence to true being \(*satya*\) is the highest value. The asura king, Bali, illustrates that value and its results. Being consistently true in the Kali Yuga may lead to the loss of wealth and status, and even of life itself, but bestows wisdom and elicits a response from Vasudeva that is more gracious than one can imagine.

Even before performing the rites of taking refuge, being true will elicit gracious love, which in turn will transform perception. In order for an asura \(or Shudra\), who by definition “is not true” \(*asatya*\), to “be true” \(*satya*\), he offers his head to Vasudeva’s foot. Ironically, by definition Vasudeva “is true,” yet his act as the deceptive Dwarf “is not true.” Giving his head was the only way the asura king could keep his word, “I give you three steps,” but as he quickly learned, in truth he did nothing, for he did not own anything that he could give to the owner of everything. All that mattered was his intent \(*sankalpa*\).

Dwarf’s “footprint” signifies that truth, and after the acharya applied it as the white and red pundra design to his or her forehead, the consecrated Bhagavata applied it there every morning \(Smith 1980: 60\). It was the Bhagavan’s “name” \(*nama*\) stamped on the forehead as the sign that the devotee was now Vasudeva’s property. All he or she could do thereafter is “be true.” But in the Kali Yuga, “being true” requires considerable insight. In its darkness, God is deceptive and tricky, always asking more than one expects. Although spacetime is his body, he appears within it as a man; although he is the God of gods, he appears as a dwarf; although he is orthoprax, he behaves heretically. He may ask for one small thing, but then takes away everything, only to give it all back with insight as interest.

We may now read the panel in reference to Nandivarman’s Bhagavata status when he built the temple. From the inscription on the prakara wall we know that when Pallavamalla was about twelve \(ca. 731–732\), he had been consecrated the Indra of People \(Narendra\) with the name Nandivarman. Indra in this panel represents that status. Later \(ca. 745–746\), he was consecrated a Bhagavata refugee by his acharya and received the title Venerable Slave of the Bhagavan \(Perumanatikal\). He then won victories that made him emperor. Bali in the panel represents that status.

We may also read the panel as depicting two views of Nandivarman as emperor. Indra represents Pallava perception of him as the consecrated ruler, while Bali represents his perception of himself. According to Bhagavata theology, Nandivarman would have seen himself as an innately “unclean” Shudra living in darkness, who was nevertheless purified, enslaved, and protected by Vasudeva by means of his acharya, whom Upendra in the middle represents.

Significantly, Bali the son of Virochana now rules like an Indra in the underworld Sutala, but is destined to become the Indra of the next manvantara, the eighth. From there he will attain the ultimate goal \(*siddhi*\) \(*BP* 3.13.12–13\). Did Bhagavatas believe that story represented Nandivarman’s destiny too? The final stanza of Kalikanri’s poem about the temple suggests they did: “The Pallavas’ Sovereign of ancient fame / Lives long in the land, / The Emperor who built the Vishnu-house / Well described by Kalikanri, / Ruler of Mangai’s people and her / Vast fields of abundant paddy, // In this rich and beautiful garland / Of Tamil purity whose skillful singers / \(By the grace of our Great Goddess Shri\) / Shall rule with brilliance in that shining World / Of abundant water surrounded by the Ocean / Which thunders like the roaring chariots / Of the kings who rule this world” \(*PT* 6.9.10\). The stanza suggests that Nandivarman will be reborn “in that world,” which appears to be the White Island of Vaikuntha in the Ocean of Milk. He will dwell there in a body resembling the Lord of Vaikuntha, and ultimately will go beyond Brahma’s body to the Vaikuntha realm outside of space and time.



### ***Panel SP3: Vaikuntha Appears to the Kumaras at the Cursing of jaya and Vijaya***

THE STORY. Brahma’s four Kumara sons, who are his eldest and completely free of any attachment, freely wander wherever they wish. They are named Sanaka \(Ancient\), Sanandana \(Joyful\), Sanatana \(Eternal\), and Sanatkumara \(Ever Young\). One time they go by means of their yogamaya to Vaikuntha’s abode known as Vaikuntham \(*BP* 3.15–16\). This transcendent realm of purity is a glorious city surrounded by seven concentric walls, with Vaikuntha’s palace at its center. All its residents have the same material form as their Lord. The Kumaras quickly pass through the city’s first six gates. At the seventh they find two handsome males of the same age, with four arms, blue skin, massive wild-flower garlands, and maces. But these gatekeepers, Jaya \(Victory\) and Vijaya \(Conquest\), appear to be angry. The four Kumara brothers, who are naked and look like five-year-old boys, customarily travel everywhere unrestricted and do not think to ask the gatekeepers’ permission when they begin to walk through this seventh gate. Jaya and Vijaya laugh at them and block their way with their maces.

This puzzles the Kumaras. The learned make no distinctions among those who dwell in the Bhagavan who holds everything within his abdomen, and instead—just as one sees the space inside a pot as the same as the space outside it—they see the individual atman as the same as the Supreme Atman. The gatekeepers look like their master yet retain a sense of difference, and this sense of difference makes them think their Lord needs protection. How can this be? The four Kumaras decide that the gatekeepers must possess some fault and should be purified by living in the worlds where their enemies are the three villains: lust, anger, and greed. They curse the two gatekeepers to that effect. Jaya and Vijaya fall at the Kumaras’ feet and plead, “You are right to punish us, but please let us not succumb to the infatuation \(*moha*\) that erases continual memory of the Bhagavan.”

The Bhagavan of the Lotus Navel learns of this incident and appears to the four Kumaras with his attendants. Above him is a white umbrella. Chamaras or fly whisks fan him, Shri shines on his breast, a yellow cloth is girdled around his hips, a garland of wildflowers hangs from his neck, and bracelets grace his wrists. One handsome forearm with a bracelet rests on the shoulder of Garuda, and the other hand twirls a lotus. He has a crown studded with gems, he wears earrings and a necklace, and the gem kaushtubha rests at his neck. The Kumaras had never before seen Vaikuntha, and ask that they may always worship his feet, even during the sorrows of other births, and like those who take refuge in them, keep his feet rather than emancipation as their highest value. Pleased by the words of these sages firm in yoga, the Lord of Vaikuntham responds with an astonishing graciousness.

Your punishment of my servants Jaya and Vijaya is just. Please pardon me, because their insult of you was mine, for the error of a servant belongs to the master. I am Vaikuntha whose glory, when heard, purifies everyone down to the eater of dogs, but it gains that power from persons like you. I would cut off my own arm if it opposed you. My feet have the power to purify and because of that Shri never leaves me, though I am not attached to her. They gain that power from people like you who worship them. I do not enjoy the offerings made to me through the mouth of the sacrificial fire as much as the offerings made to me through the mouths of Brahmins who dedicate all their acts to me and eat with satisfaction. The water poured on my feet falls on the head of Shiva and purifies the whole world, but on my crown I bear the dust from the feet of Brahmins like you. Brahmins, cows that yield milk, and those without refuge are my own body—those who think them different will be torn apart by the vultures of Yama. I am pleased when a devotee sees me in a Brahmin who insults him, and in return smiles at him and speaks to him affectionately. May you let these servants who have acted against my intentions undergo their just punishment and then return to me quickly. \(*BP* 3.16.1–12\)

This puzzles the Kumaras. How is it that the Bhagavan would worship Brahmins who worship him, and would ask them for a favor? It is by his favor, after all, that yogins cross over death. And it is he who originates the eternal dharma, protects it through his bodily descents, and is its changeless supreme secret. How amazing\! Anyone wanting something worships at the feet of Goddess Shri, yet Goddess Shri worships at his feet, but he ignores her and clings to the Parama Bhagavatas who are his servants. But the Kumaras do understand that if the Bhagavan does not protect the Brahmins, the auspicious path of the devas will be lost, because people always follow the example set by the highest authority. Vaikuntha venerates Brahmins, but this does not decrease his glory. “Please do to us whatever you wish for having punished your gatekeepers” they ask. Bhagavan Vaikuntha then tells them that Jaya and Vijaya shall be born as asuras angry at him, and that their anger will focus their mind on him. Through their confrontation with him they will develop the consciousness of samadhi and will quickly return to him, for this is his will. With great joy, the four Kumaras circumambulate the Lord, prostrate to him, and take their leave.

The Bhagavan now explains to Jaya and Vijaya that he agrees to this curse because it fulfills an earlier punishment pronounced for them by Goddess Rama when they prevented her from entering his sleeping place. “By means of consciousness unified through confrontation,” he tells them, “you shall fulfill the Brahmins’ curse and return to me quickly.” The Lord of Vaikuntham returns to his splendid palace and Jaya and Vijaya are thrown out of his dwelling place. They enter Kashyapa’s powerful seed and in the inauspicious period of sunset he deposits it in the womb of Diti. She then gives birth to the asura brothers Hiranyakashipu and Hiranyaksha.

THE PANEL. The Lord of Vaikuntham stands in the center of the panel under an umbrella in a posture of ease, resting the weight of his body on his left leg, which pushes his left hip to the west \(Figure 12.3\). He places his foot slightly forward. He has two pairs of arms. His two hands in the back hold the wheel and conch, which are damaged. His left forearm in front rests on Garuda’s right shoulder, as the story says. His right arm in the front is no longer visible, and his right hand at the side of his torso is damaged, but presumably holds the lotus the story says he twirls. Garuda with two arms stands to Vaikuntha’s left in a servile posture. He crosses his legs and bends his knees to make his right shoulder the correct height for his master’s left forearm to rest on comfortably.




FIGURE 12.3. Panel SP3: Vaikuntha appears to the Kumaras at the cursing of Jaya and Vijaya \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


Three figures stand one above the other at Vaikuntha’s right side. The very small bottom figure, with a pointed cap, perhaps a turban, has two arms and a large stomach, and rests his right hand on his hip. His left hand is missing. He remains unidentified. Of the larger figure above him only the torso and legs remain, and they are obscured by plaster. He appears to have two arms; his right hand is at his stomach and the left hand is at his chest. He may be one of Vaikuntha’s attendants. Only the head and chest of the figure above him are visible, and he appears to be an ascetic, because his right earlobe is long and is free of earrings. He is probably Sanaka, the eldest of the four Kumaras. Two male figures commonly found in other panels fly at the level of the umbrella, one on each side. The one on the west flies above Garuda, and its relatively massive form extends the mass of Garuda’s body upward so that these two figures on the western side of the panel balance the four figures on the eastern side.



## **The Panels on the Porch Facing North**

### ***Panel NP1: Bhadrashravas Worships Hayagriva in the Region of Bhadrashva***

THE STORY. This panel is an example of one scene representing multiple stories. The panel depicts the region of Jambu called Bhadrashvas \(Auspicious Horse\), which is east of the central Ilavrita region where Mount Meru stands \(*BP* 5.18.1–6\). But it also represents three stories that take place during the deluge between the previous kalpa and the Daytime of Boar, which is represented ahead by Panel W6 discussed in chapter 11. And through one of these stories it alludes to the region of Jambu called Ramyaka, which is immediately north of the Ilavrita region.

Bhadrashravas \(He of Gracious Fame\) is the son of the rishi Dharma, who is born of Brahma’s nipple; he rules this region of Bhadrashvas. Together with leaders of his clan he perceives the Bhagavan Vasudeva’s most beloved body of purity, which is made of dharma, has the head of a horse, and is commonly known as Hayagriva \(He with the Neck and Head of a Horse\). In the consciousness of supreme samadhi they worship him as depicted here, and laud his role in preserving the Vedas: “At the end of the age the Vedas were concealed by darkness at the bottom of the Rasa realm. But at the request of Brahma, you retrieved them in the form of a man-horse and gave them back to him” \(*BP* 5.18.6\). \(They refer to the stories of Hayagriva and Madhusudana discussed at Panel 19 in chapter 10.\) Their recollection of this Hayagriva story, however, evokes two other stories that take place during this same deluge between kalpas. One is the story of the asura named Hayagriva, who is an enemy of the Vedas. This story is brief, but it frames the longer and famous story of the Bhagavan as Matsya the Fish. The stories of the asura Hayagriva and of Matsya the Fish go this way \(*BP* 8.24\).

When the previous kalpa ends and the deluge is drowning all the worlds, Brahma nods off to sleep and the Vedas drop from his mouth. A king of Danavas named Hayagriva seizes them. Hari the Ruler perceives this and takes the shape of a carp fish \(*BP* 8.24.7–8\). A Dravida king named Satyavrata \(Of True Vows\) lives during this previous kalpa and is a devotee of Narayana. While performing rites in the Kritamala or Vaigai River, which runs through the Pandya realm, Hari appears to him in the river as a frightened carp \(the carp is the Pandya emblem\). Out of compassion the Pandyan responds to the carp’s appeal for help, and over time it grows larger and larger until the king realizes it is Hari Narayana in the form of a fish \(*matsya*\). One day this fish tells king Satyavrata that in seven days the cosmic deluge will occur, but that he will send a boat made of earth in which the king will put the seeds of all vegetation and animals, the Seven Seers, and himself. Throughout the night of the deluge the Seven Seers will provide light as he, as a fish, pulls the boat, which will be tied to his horn by a great snake.

King Satyavrata prepares for the deluge by making a seat of darbha grass with their pointed ends facing east, and sits on it facing northeast to meditate on Hari as Fish.5 When the deluge comes, the boat appears with the Seven Seers \(who appear on the panel corresponding to this one on the floor above at Panel 2 discussed in chapter 6\). The Seers tell the Pandyan to visualize Keshava, who will save them all. When he does this, an enormous Fish with one horn appears and they set out. The king sings to Madhusudana \(Slayer of Deluded Passion\) and takes refuge in Matsya as “the supreme guru of the guru” \(*BP* 8.24.48\). While floating in the darkness of the deluge, Matsya teaches him and the Seven Seers “the sankhya, yoga, and kriya of the divine *Purana-samhita*” \(*BP* 8.24.55\). The compound *Purana-samhita* can mean “the collection of ancient lore” and denote the puranas. Or, it can mean “the collection of the past” or “the ancient collection” and denote the Pancharatra texts called samhita. Sankhya \(metaphysical analysis\), yoga \(unified consciousness through self-discipline\), and kriya \(sacred ceremony\) are taught in both purana and samhita, but the story may refer specifically to the teaching now found in the *Satvata-samhita*. It describes itself as taught by the Plower in the Malaya mountains in the Dravida realm of the Pandyas \(Smith 1975: 515\), its teachings are illustrated by the Plower’s north-facing side, and sankhya and yoga underlie the kriya of its threefold consecration \(*dikshatraya*\).

When the deluge ends, Brahma awakes. Hari, who has slain the asura Hayagriva, now gives Brahma the Vedas to use for his new daytime. Hari also gives the Pandyan king a reward: Satyavrata will be reborn into this kalpa, the Daytime of Boar, through Surya the Sun and reign during our seventh Manu Term. His name will be Shraddhadeva, and as the son of Sun \(Vaivasvata\) he will be the progenitor of the Solar Dynasty through Ikshvaku \(*BP* 9.1–3\). In the *Bhagavad-gita* Krishna told Arjuna that he had taught unchanging yoga to Sun \(Vivasvata\), who had taught it to Manu, who had taught it to Ikshvaku, who had passed it on to royal seers, but that the tradition \(*parampara*\) was finally lost \(*BG* 4.1–3\). Krishna thus taught it anew for the Lunar Dynasty and summarized its supreme secret in *Bhagavad-gita* 4.4–42.

THE PANEL. This panel, like others, suffers from what appears to be a layer of plaster that is not original and that obscures original details, some of which are visible where the plaster is broken. The large figure of Hayagriva stands in the western half of the panel, facing the viewer, with the crowned head of a horse \(Figure 12.4\). His shoulders turn slightly eastward toward Bhadrashravas and two leaders of his clan aligned vertically at the eastern side of the panel. Hayagriva has two pairs of arms. His back two hands hold the conch and wheel, his front left hand rests on his left hip, and his front right hand appears to form a mudra at his right breast. Plaster obscures the details of his royal dress, which extends down to his ankles.




FIGURE 12.4. Panel NP1: Bhadrashravas worships Hayagriva in the region of Bhadrashva \(prior to repair\). Source unidentified.


Bhadrashravas and his companions have crowns and one pair of arms. Bhadrashravas, the larger male sitting in samadhi at the level of Hayagriva’s feet, looks directly forward, and holds his left hand at his breast and his right at his stomach. Damage has erased the gestures of the hands. Two leaders of his clan stand behind him, one above the other. The man behind Bhadrashravas holds his right hand at his chest, looks upward toward Hayagriva, and gestures toward him with his open left hand. The man behind him gazes directly forward, but his arms are not visible. Damage to the panel above him suggests that a fourth clan leader stood behind him. The four figures flying at the top of the panel appear to be the four Kumara sons of Brahma named Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, and Sanatkumara. As the eldest, Sanaka would be the larger figure on the west facing directly forward and forming the anjalimudra at his chest. The three behind him hold their right hand at the chest and raise their open left hand upward in praise \(the left hand of the fourth is not visible\). All four appear to wear beads around their necks, wrists, and upper arms, and have their hair piled up as if a crown.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. According to Bhagavata cosmography, our ruling Vaivasvata Manu, the son of Sun, worships Matsya the Fish in the region of Jambu called Ramyaka. For him, Fish is the embodiment of purity \(*sattva*\) who sounds the Veda and—like a man pulling the strings of a female puppet—controls the universe from inside and out, yet remains invisible even to the world’s protectors \(*BP* 5.18.24–28; 8.13.1\). Oddly enough, that invisible carp simultaneously represents the internally controlling Ordainer, the externally controlling Surya, and a devout lineage of Bhagavatas in the Pandya Dynasty of Madurai.

The Sun as our Manu’s father brings us back to the horse in this panel. Surya the Sun appeared as a horse when Yajnavalkya prayed the Gayatri mantra to him \(as depicted earlier in the Kalki and Maru panel, Panel W4\). Appearing with a horse’s head and neck, he taught Yajnavalkya the set of Yajus mantras said to be derived from “the speedy one,” a horse.6 Sun with the head of a horse also suggests dynastic regeneration through the lengthy horse sacrifice, just as Daksha with the head of a goat \(in Panel SP1\) represents the lengthy sattra \(BP 4.2–8, esp. 4.7.8\).7

The *Vishnudharmottara Purana*, a supplement to the *Vishnu Purana* of about the seventh century \(dated by Kramrisch 1928, 3–5\), confirms this panel’s connection to the Plower formation and the jnana and bala he manifests. The Plower \(Samkarshana\), that text says, represents the Pancharatra Agama, and Hayagriva is a form of Samkarshana.8 Moreover, Hayagriva represents the *Sama Veda* with which Krishna identified himself in *Bhagavad-gita* 10.22. The *Sama Veda*, a collection of mantras mostly from the *Rig Veda*, is sung during sacrifices by the udgatri priest. For Bhagavatas initiated into the eight-syllable mantra, the Kali Yuga version of the *Sama Veda* was the communal singing of sankirtana using the sacred sound *Om*.

If we place the story in the context of eighth-century Kanchipuram, the asura named Hayagriva evokes Hayagriva in the Buddhist cult of Avalokiteshvara, specifically in the latter’s role as Lord of the World \(Lokanatha\). Hayagriva and Tara are important figures in that cult, and Hayagriva was known as Bodhisattva Hayagriva Avalokiteshvara. In the presently existing Kamakshi temple in Kanchipuram, which has replaced the original, sculptures of Tara and Hayagriva have been found, suggesting that a Lokanatha temple once stood at the city’s center near the then-existing Goddess shrine \(Venkataraman 1968: 15\).

The story of Hayagriva is thus connected to Esoteric Buddhism. According to Rob Linrothe, Esoteric Buddhists adopted the “Brahmanical Hayagriva” because the sound of a horse’s neighing resembles the power of the spoken dharani, or spell, and his swiftness that of a bodhisattva \(Linrothe 1999: 86–87\). Sculptural evidence for the Buddhist Hayagriva appears in Aurangabad’s Cave 7, which dates in the late sixth or early seventh century \(Linrothe 1999: 87\). The earliest textual evidence for him so far dates to 653 in the *Dharani Samgraha* translated into Chinese, and in the Gilgit manuscripts, whose orthography dates them to the sixth to seventh centuries \(Linrothe 1999: 91\). A short dharani text on Hayagriva from Gilgit, Linrothe said, “Invokes the image of a horse-faced deity \(Hayagriva\) above the images of Lokesvara Avalokitesvara, who is flanked by Vajradhara \(i.e., Vajrapani\) and Avalokitesvara. The fact that the manuscript requires that Hayagriva be visualized as *vadavamukha* \(horse-headed\) testifies to his relation to the pre-Buddhist Hayagriva, who is visualized in such a way” \(Linrothe 1999: 91\).

Despite that textual requirement, as Linrothe noted, the sculpted remains of the Buddhist Hayagriva usually do not depict him with a horse’s head, but with the pot belly of a vamana or yaksha, or the slim form of a hero \(*vira*\), and with fangs. Linrothe described an early image from Nalanda this way: “He stands with one leg bent behind the other, leaning to the side and looking slightly upwards. He appears to be of the *vamana-* Yaksha body type. Though he barely emerges from the shadowy background, the features of his distinctly grotesque face are visible: furrowed eyebrows and forehead, a hooked nose and a grin that exposes fangs. He makes the *vinayahasta* gesture, crossing his wrists in front of his chest. The Nalanda Hayagriva’s hair is relatively short, separated into fat ‘Guptesque’ curls that divide in the center and frame his face…. His lower torso is damaged, but he seems to wear a *dhoti*, leaving his upper torso bare. Large earrings hang at his ears, and a bulky necklace circles his neck” \(Linrothe 1999: 97\).

Although Linrothe cites Robert H. van Gulik’s opinion that the name Hayagriva was independently given to an asura opponent of Vishnu, it seems to me that the asura Hayagriva in the *Bhagavata Purana* depicts the Bhagavata judgment of the Buddhist Hayagriva. The asura Hayagriva appears briefly in the *Mahabharata*, which also contains a reasoned critique of Buddhist Dharma by a descendent of the seer Kapila, who taught samkhya and yoga \(*Santi Parva* 218; Ganguli 1980, 1990 9:115–117 and notes\). Possibly the *Bhagavata Purana* story of the asura Hayagriva was about a specific Buddhist shrine in Kanchipuram. The *Dharani Samgraha* of 653 prescribes a bodhimanda or altar for Bodhisattva Hayagriva Avalokiteshvara that faces west, as did all the Bhagavata shrines of early Kanchipuram. According to Linrothe’s summary: “In the middle of the altar should be an image of Hayagriva, on the eastern side should be Ekadasamukha \(eleven-headed\) Avalokitesvara, at the northern side the eight-armed \(Amoghapasa?\) Avalokitesvara, in the south the eight Naga-raja…. The \[aspirant\] should enter the *bodhi-manda* and do *puja-*worship. One should concentrate on Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva. Then in the midst of worship of all the bodhisattva, *siddhis* \(powers\) will be manifest” \(Linrothe 1999: 90\). As Linrothe noted, the emphasis in that altar and worship is on Avalokiteshvara; Hayagriva is merely an adjunct to him, “at best, a manifestation, or a *dharani* personification,” because siddhis flow from Avalokiteshvara.

Perhaps the asura Hayagriva is the Bhagavata way to criticize the Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara without naming him directly. The siddhis his worship generates may refer to the siddhis produced by Vedic fire rites employed by Esoteric Buddhist priests on behalf of the Kanchipuram court. Such Buddhist fire rites are referred to in the Tamil poem *Manimekalai*, where Brahmin Buddhist practitioners appear as “illegitimate” Brahmins \(Hudson 1997\). Reflecting a long-standing cultic rivalry in the royal court prior to Nandivarman’s rule, the story of the demon Hayagriva appears to critique Esoteric Buddhist rites from the Bhagavata perspective. The south-facing Vaikuntha panel directly opposite this one \(Panel SP3\) refers to such rivalry, because its story says that the Bhagavata king has the duty to strengthen Dharma at a time when the Dharma of imposters \(*pakhanda*\) is appealing.

In the *Bhagavata Purana*, the story of the demon Hayagriva frames the story of Matsya the Fish. That story in turn introduces the Solar Dynasty of Ikshvaku from whom both Rama of the *Ramayana* and the Shakyamuni Buddha descended. According to Sridhara Svamin in *Bhavarthabodhini*, the oldest commentary on the *Bhagavata Purana*, the Fish story does not describe an actual deluge but rather an initiatory vision resembling Markandeya’s later visionary experience of a deluge during which he received a special revelation.9 Markandeya is depicted ahead at Panel N4 \(Figure 13.6\). As a metaphor for historic events, the Fish story suggests that sometime in the past the Veda had been “rescued” in the Dravida realm of the Pandyas through royal patronage of the Pancharatra Agama. As noted earlier, the story of the *Manimekalai* \(ca. sixth century\) suggests that the contest was between the Bhagavatas and the Esoteric Buddhists.



### ***Panel NP2: The Person of the Sacrifice Announces Rishabha’s Birth***

This panel and the next, NP3, appear to represent the stories of Rishabha and his son Bharata. Brief versions of these stories appear in the *Vishnu Purana* \(2.1.27–34\). In the *Bhagavata Purana*, however, they are lengthy and told with specific reference to the first Jaina Tirthankara named Rishabha, his son Bharata, and Rishabha’s nine ascetic sons “clothed in the wind,” and with brief reference to the fifth tirthankara, named Sumati.

These panels devoted to the path of refuge testify to its importance for southern Bhagavatas by the eighth century, as the *Bhagavata Purana* confirms in one the few portions that may reasonably be dated. The portion consists of the story of Rishabha and his son Bharata, which comprises chapters two through fifteen of Book Five, and the story of Rishabha’s nine shramana sons, who are “clothed in the wind” \(*vatarashana*\), which comprises chapters two through five of Book Eleven. The stories of Rishabha and Bharata appear to have been inserted in a book that otherwise teaches cosmology, and the story of Rishabha’s shramana sons appears to have been inserted into the Krishna-katha as it leads to the destruction of the Yadavas. The entire portion may be dated to eighth- or ninth-century Kanchipuram, during Pallava rule.

As we discussed in chapter 1, there are two reasons for this dating. Pad-manabha Jaini provides the first in his discussion of the Jaina story of the tirthankara Rishabha, which, he argues, gave rise to the Bhagavata story of Rishabha in the *Bhagavata Purana* \(Jaini 1977: 321–337\). Jaini does not include the stories of Rishabha’s shramana sons, but it appears to me that they belong to the same body of lore, which Narada refers to as an “old legend” \(*itihasa puratana*\) about a discussion between Rishabha’s sons and a king of Videha named Nimi \(*BP* 11.2.14\). The second reason for this dating appears in the lesson the shramana named Karabhajana teaches King Nimi, which we will discuss at Panel N3 below \(*BP* 11.5.29–34\). Since, as argued in chapter 1, this portion of the *Bhagavata Purana* cannot be earlier than the sixth century CE, and more likely belongs to the eighth or ninth century, it coincides with Jaini’s dating. Moreover, it coincides with the Alvar poets who illustrated in their poems the doctrine that Karabhajana says is popular in Dravida: complete submission to the “Giver of Emancipation” \(Mukunda\), with no debts or obligations to any other being, and with love \(*priya*\) completely focused on him \(*BP* 11.5.41–42\).

THE STORY. The story takes place during the first Manu Term, when Brahma’s son Svayambhuva is the ruling Manu \(*BP* 5.1–5\). The Manu and his son Priyavrata dwell in the valley of the mountain Gandhamadana. Narada appears and teaches Priyavarta about the atman and about Krishna, and Priyavrata resolves to keep his mind continuously focused on the Bhagavan. Brahma assures Priyavrata that because he has conquered the enemies of the six senses and the Lord’s lotus feet are his protection, he can enjoy the task of kingship he has been assigned and then abandon it. Accordingly, Svayambhuva Manu enthrones his son and retires. Priyavrata rules Earth for eleven crores of years, continuously focused on the Bhagavan and without desire, though he enjoys the pleasures of his wife Barhishmati. They have ten sons and one daughter. Three sons \(Kavi, Mahavira, and Savana\) renounce the world as paramahamsas and are constantly in Vasudeva’s presence. Three sons by another wife become the third, fourth, and fifth Manus \(Uttama, Tamasa, and Raivata\).

Priyavrata is equal to Surya in splendor and speed, and one day he follows Surya’s chariot around Mount Meru in his own brilliant chariot, seeking to banish night and give the whole of Earth daylight at the same time. Seven times he rides around, and seven times the wheels of his brilliant chariot dig concentric ruts in Earth. These ruts become seven oceans. Between these oceans are seven continents, and Priyavrata assigns his remaining seven sons by Barhishmati to rule them. Finally he gives up the throne and becomes an ascetic.

Agnidhra, Priyavarta’s eldest son, now rules Jambu. He and an apsaras singer named Purvachitti have nine sons. Each rules a region of the Jambu continent and marries one of Mount Meru’s nine daughters. Nabhi, the eldest, rules the southernmost region later called Bharata. He and his wife Merudevi sponsor a fire sacrifice in order to gain a son. During these rites the Yajna-purusha, or Person of the Sacrifice, appears with two pairs of arms, dressed in all his splendor, and bearing the conch, lotus, flower garland, wheel, Kaushtubha jewel, mace, and so forth. He promises that a part of him will be born as their son. This son is Rishabha, born with a body of purity \(*sattva*\) to demonstrate to the world the dharma of naked shramanas who observe chastity, and to demonstrate that rituals motivated by desire are not the primary teaching of Veda \(*BP* 5.3.20; 5.7.12\).

Nabhi installs Rishabha as ruler and leaves with Merudevi. Rishabha, the Ruler of Yoga who can bring rain, dwells in a region of sacrificial rites and therefore learns the Vedas with a guru and becomes a householder. Indra gives him Jayanti as wife, and they have one hundred sons equal to their father, nine of whom are great ascetic Bhagavatas who teach Bhagavata Dharma. Rishabha rules perfectly, everyone has all they need, and no one desires anything other than greater love for him. Rishabha expounds bhakti in an assembly of Brahmin rishis and lauds the Brahmin who contains the Vedas within his self. Food offered Vasudeva by feeding a Brahmin, he says, is more acceptable than food offered through the Vedic fire.

After this, Rishabha places Bharata on the throne and, to demonstrate the life of the paramahamsa ascetic, leaves with nothing but his body, completely nude and with disheveled hair \(*BP* 5.28–35\). At times he appears to be mad, blind, dumb, deaf, drunk, and is silent and unresponsive to anyone. Wherever he travels people persecute him with violent abuse, but nothing disturbs him, for he is absorbed in the atman. In appearance he is naturally handsome and attractive, but he now appears ghoulish, and people find him repulsive. Since wandering brings only abuse, he adapts the discipline of the python and lies down and remains in one place; he takes his food in this place and then rolls in his excreta until it covers him—yet his feces is fragrant for the distance of ten yojanas. Then he adopts the discipline of the cow, deer, and crow—walking, sitting, eating, drinking, and excreting as they do—and then other disciplines, and all the while he rejects the siddhi powers inevitably produced by such discipline of self. His extraordinary tapas refines his body to an exceptional degree, and he moves southward to the region of Konka, Venka, and Kutaka in southern Karnataka. In the forest at the foot of the mountain Kutakachala he keeps stones in his mouth and dwells like a ghoul, hair in disarray and naked. When the forest catches fire it consumes his body.

In the Kali Yuga, the king of Konka, Venka, and Kutaka named Arhat will hear about Rishabha’s behavior and out of delusion will follow it. In this age when unrighteousness thrives, his deluded understanding of it will promote the evil ways of the pakhanda imposters. The delusion of God’s maya will lead people of the Kali Yuga to abandon their own rites and disciplines and to take up wicked vows that mock the devas. They will not bathe, rinse their mouths, or observe rules of purity, and they will pull out the hair of their heads with their own hands. They will reject the *brahman*, the authority of the Brahmins, the Person of the Sacrifice, the Vedas, the teachers of the Vedas, and the God the Vedas reveal, and will fall into complete darkness. What then is the purpose of this Rishabha avatara? It is to help those who have an abundance of passion \(*rajas*\) to attain emancipation characterized by “isolation” or kaivalya.

Through these stories radical ascetic practices associated with Digambara Jaina shramanas patronized by rulers in Karnataka are brought into Bhagavata Dharma as consistent with the Vedic sacrifice that Jaina teaching rejects; at the same time, Jaina shramanas and their devotees in Karnataka are condemned as deluded. Bhagavatas flourishing in the Dravida realm, however, are extolled. Historical details in these stories as told in the *Bhagavata Purana* suggest that they were composed after this temple was built, which means these panels illustrate earlier versions.

THE PANEL. Plaster obscures the details. A kinnari, half woman and half bird, stands on the lintel directly above the central standing figure of the Person of the Sacrifice \(Figure 12.5\). From her head to her waist she appears human, with bare breasts and long stretched earlobes. She wears no crown and faces directly forward. Her left hand holds vertically a staff that may have an object on its top. Her right arm reaches to the east in an unknown gesture. Beneath the cloth that surrounds her waist she appears as a bird. Her legs bend at the knees toward the east as if dancing, and a very long and fully feathered tail resembling that of a peacock emerges from under her skirt to the west and curves up to the level of her face. This kinnari signifies the northern mountains where Nabhi’s palace is located.




FIGURE 12.5. Panel NP2: The Person of the Sacrifice announces Rishabha’s birth \(prior to repair\). Source unidentified.


Directly under her and the lintel stands the Person of the Sacrifice announcing the birth of Rishabha to Nabhi and Merudevi during the fire sacrifice they sponsor \(Figure 12.6\). He stands in a stiff frontal position, wearing a tall crown, and has two pairs of arms. His right hand at the back holds the wheel \(damaged\), but the left hand and the conch it holds are missing. He rests his front left hand on his left hip and forms the abhayamudra with his right hand at the side of his right breast. Two unidentified crowned males stand at his sides outside the pillars and lintel enclosing him. The one on the Yajnapur-usha’s right holds his open right hand at his chest with palm facing inward, and holds his left hand at his left breast, bending his fingers toward the palm. The one on his left holds his left hand at his chest with an uncertain mudra; his right hand is indiscernible.




FIGURE 12.6. The Person of the Sacrifice announces Rishabha’s birth. Photo by Sathya Seelan.




## ***Panel NP3: The Person of the Sacrifice Appears to Rishabha’s Son Bharata***

THE STORY. Rishabha’s eldest son Bharata is consecrated king, marries, and has five sons \(*BP* 5.7–14\). During his rule, the region Ajanabha receives its current name of Bharata. He is a pious sponsor of Vedic sacrifices in many forms, and offers their many fruits to Vasudeva. These acts purify Bharata’s consciousness, his bhakti develops, and Vasudeva appears in his heart as the Person of the Sacrifice wearing the Shrivatsa emblem, the kaushtubha gem, the wild flower garland, the conch, wheel, mace, and so forth. This appearance moves Bharata’s bhakti to a deeper level. He rules for thousands of years and then turns his realm over to his five sons, becomes an ascetic, and wanders to the ashram of Pulaha near the Chakranadi River. Dressed in deerskin, he lives a detached ascetic life of extraordinary devotion.

Nevertheless, unconsumed karmic fruits transform his compassion for a distressed fawn into attachment to her, and this attachment leads him to neglect both yoga and bhakti altogether. When Bharata dies, therefore, he is born in the Kalanjara mountains as a fawn. But he retains remembrance of his previous life. He leaves his mother to wander and returns to the ashrams of Pulaha and Pulastya, where he waits until his unconsumed karma has run its course, and then drowns himself in a river. Bharata is then born to an Angirasa Brahmin’s second wife as a boy with a twin sister. To detach himself from his family he adopts the extreme practices of the avadhuta ascetic followed by his earlier father, Rishabha. And his adventures—including being offered as a human victim to Goddess Bhadra Kali—illustrate vividly the supremely detached stance toward the world produced by devotion to Vasudeva through the prolonged ascetic practice of yoga. The story does not relate the end of Bharata’s life as an Angirasa Brahmin avadhuta. But it does say that he has a descendent named Sumati, who also follows Rishabha’s extreme asceticism. In the Kali Yuga, we are told, pakhanda imposters of deluded minds will worship him as a non-Vedic devata or deity \(*BP* 5.15.1\). Sumati is the name of the seventh Jaina tirthankara.

Bharata’s nine brothers who are great Bhagavatas are also shramanas resembling the Digambaras, ascetics “clothed by the four directions of space.” But they are arhats, or enlightened beings, who perceive the entire universe as the Bhagavan’s shape and roam freely however they wish. One day they appear at a scriptural discussion that numerous rishis conduct on behalf of King Nimi in Mithila of Videha. At the king’s request, these nine shramanas enter into a very long discussion of Bhagavata Dharma, each making his own contribution \(*BP* 11.2–5\). They appear to provide a glimpse of the Bhagavata religion developing in Dravida during the eighth and ninth centuries.

The teaching of the shramana named Karabhajana is of particular interest \(*BP* 11.5.19–42\). In the Dvapara Yuga, he says, the Bhagavan is worshiped with the rites of Veda and Tantra \(as in the Pancharatra Agama\). But in the Kali Yuga he is worshiped with various Tantra rites in a form possessing a black complexion brilliant as sapphire, with all his arms, decorations, weapons, and attendants. Worshipers extol his glories and names through the group singing of sankirtana, and they pray a mantra that ends with a description of Rama, who leaves Adyodhya and chases a wild animal made of maya desired by Sita. The Kali Yuga is the greatest of the four ages because people attain their goal merely through sankirtana; no better method exists. “People for whom Narayana is the last resort,” Karabhajana observes, “appear more often in the Kali Yuga than in other times, and especially in the Dravida region,” by which he means the Pandya, Pallava, Chola, and Chera realms.

THE PANEL. An elephant with four tusks carrying four riders stands on the lintel facing west, following the tall umbrella of a royal procession \(Figure 12.7\). The mahout at the elephant’s head is the largest of the riders. The man behind him raises his right hand to his face, the man behind him holds a pole with a flag pointed eastward, and the last man sits above the elephant’s tail. A cloth with bells at its edge is draped over the elephant and is tied down by a strap running underneath its belly. An elephant with four tusks belongs to the species of Airavata, who was churned up from the Milk Ocean and taken by Indra \(*BP* 10.59.37\). A king who rules as an “Indra of Men” keeps an elephant, too, but in the Kali Yuga royal elephants have only two tusks. This elephant signifies the rule of King Bharata during the perfect Krita Yuga.




FIGURE 12.7. Panel NP3: The Person of the Sacrifice appears to Rishabha’s son Bharata with guardian on the west \(prior to repair\). Photo by Hudson, 1993.


Beneath the lintel is the Person of the Sacrifice as he appears in Bharata’s heart, effecting the change that leads Bharata to become an avadhuta ascetic \(Figure 12.8\). He faces forward and is royally dressed with a crown and two pairs of arms. His back pair of hands holds the wheel and the conch. His front left hand rests on his hip and his right hand forms the abhayamudra at his waist. The royally dressed and crowned male standing to his left bends gracefully eastward and forms the anjalimudra at his chest. The figure of the male to his right is badly damaged and indiscernible.




FIGURE 12.8. The Person of the Sacrifice appears to Bharata with guardian on the west. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


To the west of this set \(the viewer’s right\) is the roofed structure housing the guard on the western side of the central and closed window. The guard wears an elaborate crown and is dressed royally, but appears to have only one pair of arms. Bending slightly westward he rests right hand on his hip, and holds a closed blossom upright at the side of his chest with his left hand.




