+++
title = "२ Introduction"
+++
Bhakti Is the Essence of All Scriptures 
ŚRI JIVA GOSVĀMI wrote Bhāgavata Sandarbha, a set of six books called Tattva, Bhagavat, Paramatma, Kṛṣṇa, Bhakti, and Priti Sandarbhas, as a comprehensive analysis of Bhāgavata Purana. According to him, Bhāgavata Purana delineates three topics, namely, sambandha, abhidheya, and prayojana. Sambandha refers to the ontological relation of the jiva as well as of primordial nature (prakrti) with the Absolute Reality (para-tattva), abhidheya means the recommended method to actualize this relation, and prayojana means the end state to be attained through perfection of the method. The first four books in Śri Jiva's anthology delineate sambandha, while the fifth and the sixth describe abhidheya and prayojana, respectively. 
The concept of sambandha, or "relation," naturally includes sambandhi, "the intended object of such a relation," with whom the individual self is intrinsically related as the part to the whole. The sambandhi is identified as Śrī Krsna, the highest manifestation of Absolute Reality. The abhidheya is devotional service, bhakti, and the prayojana is love for Kṛṣṇa, priti. These three topics are introduced in Tattva Sandarbha and form the themes of the remaining five Sandarbhas. Bhagavat Sandarbha delineates the nature of Bhagavan in general, who is the ultimate manifestation of Reality as the supreme transcendence. Paramätma Sandarbha explains the relation between the individual living being and Paramātmā, as well as between Paramātmā and the cosmos. Paramātmā is the same Reality in His feature of supreme immanence. Krsna Sandarbha 
xxixIntroduction 
establishes Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the original complete form of Bhagavan and as the source of all other avataras. With this analysis, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi completes the description of sambandha-tattva. 
The present Sandarbha, which is the fifth volume in the anthology, deals with abhidheya, the prescribed method to actualize our relation with Bhagavan. Based upon the study of Bhagavata Purāņa, this method is ascertained as bhakti to Kṛṣṇa. The author systematically demonstrates that although there are descriptions of karma, yoga, and jñāna in Bhagavata Purana, it is ultimately bhakti alone that is identified as the true and complete method. Bhakti has never been established as the abhidheya so systematically and emphatically as in this book. Earlier, bhakti was generally considered only as one among a set of spiritual processes that include karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, and aṣṭanga-yoga. Moreover, it was usually taken as a precursor to jñāna, which ultimately leads to liberation. Rarely was it recognized as an independent process by itself. In contrast to this, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī asserts that bhakti is the only abhidheya worth following and that all other processes are futile without it, like the thrashing of empty husks to obtain rice. Other practices have lasting significance only if they are graced by bhakti. 
In the beginning of Bhagavata Purana, sage Saunaka posed six questions to his teacher, Śrī Sūta Gosvāmi. One of the questions was about the quintessence of the practices described in the Vedic scriptures, the application of which would bring complete peace and fulfillment of the self (ātmā suprasīdati, Bhāgavata Purāṇa 1.1.11). In response to this, Śrī Sūta affirmed that only unmotivated, unobstructed bhakti to Krsna can result in complete peace and spiritual fulfillment. Thus, in the very beginning of Bhāgavata Purana, its essential subject matter is specified as pure bhakti to Kṛṣṇa. The remainder of the book expands on the theme of bhakti. Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi composed Bhakti Sandarbha to make this fact explicit. 
Bhakti Sandarbha is thus an elaborate analysis of bhakti as it has been presented in Bhagavata Purana. The bhakti theology merits study in its three aspects, namely, the object of devotion (Bhagavän), His relation with the individual self, who is the subject or the 
XXX 
Introduction 
performer of devotion, and the intrinsic nature of devotion itself. These three are interrelated and interdependent. Most Vaiṣṇava teachers have focused on the delineation of the first two theoretical aspects, although it is the third aspect that is the center of their teachings regarding practice. Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī gives an introduction to these three topics in Tattva Sandarbha and then elaborates upon them in the next five Sandarbhas. The first topic is covered in Bhagavat and Krsna Sandarbhas, the second topic, in Paramātma Sandarbha, and the third, in Bhakti and Priti Sandarbhas. In Bhakti Sandarbha, he discusses the practical aspect of bhakti, focusing primarily on bhakti as a method and thus specifying its nature and practice. In Priti Sandarbha, he elaborates on the emotive aspect of bhakti and shows how it is relished as rasa by qualified devotees. 
Bhakti As the Remedy to Human Suffering 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi begins Bhakti Sandarbha by pinpointing the root cause of the living being's suffering in this world. He says that although by nature a jiva is conscious and thus superior to matter, yet it is marred by ignorance in regard to the Absolute Reality. This ignorance has no beginning, and thus it is not initiated by any action or intent either of the jiva or Bhagavan. It is the basis of the turning of regard away from Bhagavan and bhakti, technically known as the state of bhagavad-vaimukhya. This non-recognition of one's authentic identity leads to misidentification with the body as the self. This further results in attachment to objects that are pleasing to the mind and senses and aversion to objects that are displeasing. These two-attachment (rāga) and aversion (dvesşa) are the fundamental affects of the human mind, and they give rise to further emotions, such as anger, fear, greed, grief, and depression. The end result of all these is suffering and bondage to material life. 
Since the root cause of suffering is ignorance of Bhagavan, naturally the solution is awareness of Him. This awareness ensues from bhakti, which begins by turning one's regard toward Bhagavän (bhagavad-sammukhya). In this manner, bhakti eradicates the 
xxxi 
Introduction 
root cause of all suffering. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi shows that the import of all scriptures is in bhakti. This is certainly true for Bhāgavata Purāṇa, which was composed specifically for this purpose. He undertakes a lengthy analysis to show that the topic of discussion between all the primary teachers and students in Bhāgavata Purāṇa is bhakti. 
Bhakti As the Complete Method 
A perfect or complete method should be suitable for all and not limited only to a certain class of people. It should not depend on any other process and should bring about immediate experience of the Complete Reality, which is Bhagavan. Paramātmā and Brahman, which are the intended goals of yoga and jñāna, respectively, are but partial manifestations of Bhagavan. For a process to be complete, it must also be perpetual and not come to an end after granting its result. Moreover, it must be within the scope of one's life experience and not something that one realizes only in the hereafter. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi shows that it is bhakti alone that meets all these criteria. 
It should be noted that although Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī establishes bhakti as the method, or sadhana, it is not sadhana in the traditional sense. Generally, sadhana is understood as the cause for its outcome, known as sadhya, just as milk is the cause for yogurt. Bhakti is not sadhana in this sense, because the outcome of bhakti is also bhakti and not anything else. Moreover, bhakti as a method is not a material undertaking that leads to a transphenomenal result. Rather, bhakti is transphenomenal even in its practice stage. It descends or is transmitted to a qualified practitioner by the grace of an already accomplished devotee. Consequently, bhakti is termed as a method (sadhana) specifically in the sense of its own self-manifestation in a practicing devotee. 
Bhakti as a method is not sectarian. Since it involves the simple turning of regard toward the Absolute, it is not dependent on birth, gender, or age. In Bhagavat and Paramatma Sandarbhas, it is described that the one Absolute Reality manifests as Brahman 
xxxii 
Introduction 
to the jñānis, Paramātmā to the yogis, and Bhagavan to the bhaktas. Since Bhagavan is the most complete manifestation of Reality and the source of Brahman as well as Paramātmā, the awareness of a bhakta is superior to that of a jñānī or a yogi, meaning that it includes and transcends the latter two. 
Before Bhakti Sandarbha was written, karma and jñāna were the prevalent paths. Most people participated in the varṇāśrama system, and heaven (svarga) was the most cherished goal. Some rare individuals took to the path of renunciation, jñāna, which aims at realizing one's identity with Brahman. For such jñānīs, bhakti was a mere aid to Brahman realization. Even great Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, such as Śrī Rāmānuja and Sri Madhva, propagated bhakti as a means for mukti in the form of entry into Vaikuntha. On the authority of scriptures, however, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi conclusively established bhakti as the means as well as the end, superior even to the different types of mukti. Knowing well that bhakti was not generally accepted as an independent path in contemporary society, he devoted a major part of this book to this effect. 
Above all, bhakti is the intrinsic potency of Bhagavan and thus proceeds directly from Him. Through the medium of a perfected devotee, the same potency is manifested in the heart of a qualified practicing devotee. Thus, bhakti is a direct flow of the intrinsic potency and is also the sole method to realize the highest manifestation of Reality, Bhagavan. For these reasons, it is the most complete abhidheya. 
The Nature of Bhakti 
After establishing bhakti as the complete method, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi discusses the nature of bhakti. Bhakti, being the intrinsic potency of Bhagavan, has the power to purify even by slight contact. It removes all inauspiciousness, obstacles, and fear and destroys reactions to all past and present karma. It bestows fearlessness and uproots ignorance, which is the cause of suffering and bondage. Bhakti entails both knowledge as well as action. Since bhakti is 
xxxiii 
Introduction 
beyond the gunas of nature, the knowledge and actions that ensue from bhakti are also nonmaterial. Bhakti is self-manifest, conscious, and blissful in nature, and awards love for Bhagavan. It is not dormant within a jiva but descends by the grace of a pure devotee. Even a semblance of bhakti can award mukti. The only thing that can thwart bhakti are offenses. For this reason, Śrī Jiva Gosvami elaborates upon them and their effects on a practitioner. 
One of the fundamental characteristics of bhakti is that it is causeless. Being transphenomenal in nature, it cannot be attained by any material action. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi shows that bhakti is attainable only by the association of a devotee. Even the grace of Bhagavān is secondary to the will of His devotee. Out of love for His devotee, Bhagavan remains under the control of His devotee. Moreover, He is untouched by any material misery and is ever absorbed in beatific pastimes with His devotees. Being thus transcendentally situated, He is entirely beyond the range of empathy with the material suffering of the jivas. Śrī Jiva draws this conclusion by pointing out that empathy with another's suffering is a transformation of the heart that occurs only when there is contact with that person's suffering, which is simply not the case for Bhagavan, as much as darkness is absent in the effulgence of the sun. A devotee who has attained perfection on the path of bhakti, however, can empathize with the conditioned living beings, because such a devotee still retains the memory of material suffering, although he himself is situated beyond it. Thus, bhakti is transmitted only by Bhagavan's devotees existing in the material world, who do so out of compassion for the plight of suffering humanity. By this reasoning, the author stresses the importance of association with devotees, sat-sanga. 
Levels of Bhakti 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī states that highly realized or perfected beings (mahāntas) among the sat are of two types: those who have realized Brahman and those who have attained prema for Bhagavan. The latter category has three further divisions: those who have attained 
χχχίν 
Introduction 
spiritual bodies as associates of Bhagavan, those who are altogether free of material desires, and those who still retain subconscious seeds of desire albeit in an inactive state. The intensity of a devotee's love determines his or her vision. For the benefit of neophytes, Śri Jiva Gosvāmi describes the characteristics of various levels of devotees and makes three divisions of them on the basis of their intensity of love for Bhagavan. 
Śrī Jiva further explains that the love of a devotee can take the mood of a servant, a friend, a parent, or an amorous lover, each of these being successively superior in terms of the completion and intensity of their love. Association with a specific devotee nurtures a corresponding devotional faith, mood, and attraction for a particular form of Bhagavan. This defies the misconception that bhakti is inherent in the jiva. Śrī Jiva also describes how the association with a devotee takes effect in progressive stages along the path of bhakti. In enumerating the various limbs of bhakti in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī specifies taking shelter of a guru as the first and foremost. In Bhakti Sandarbha, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi elaborates on the process of accepting a guru. He identifies three primary types of gurus in accordance with their roles - namely, the śravana, sikṣā, and mantra-gurus. 
Definition of Bhakti 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi explains that the word bhakti is derived from the verbal root √bhaj, which means "to serve." This mood of service to Bhagavan is thus understood to be the svarupa-lakṣaṇa, or the intrinsic characteristic, of bhakti, defining bhakti in terms of its constitutional makeup. Service is to be carried out with one's entire being, which includes the body, mind, and speech. Service can be motivated by a desire for the fruit or without any such motive. Service that is performed exclusively for the pleasure of Bhagavan without any desire for material or spiritual benefit is considered as the best. From this definition, it is clear that bhakti is not limited to any specific action. All actions performed by way of the mind, body, and speech can be part of bhakti if executed for 
XXXV 
Introduction 
the pleasure of Bhagavan. Even actions such as sleeping, bathing, or attending to one's physical needs can be indirectly included in bhakti, because they are necessary for maintaining good health and a stable mind. By way of comparison, the extrinsic characteristic of bhakti (tatastha-lakṣana) is concerned not with bhakti's constitution but with its effects - namely, that it can fulfill all aspirations of a devotee and can bestow even the direct realization of the Absolute in Its three aspects of Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavan. Taken together, the svarupa and taṭastha-lakṣaṇas of bhakti form its complete definition. 
Divisions of Bhakti 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī divides bhakti into three classes, namely, aropasiddha, referring to the attribution of bhakti to the act of offering prescribed Vedic duties or worldly actions to Bhagavan; sangasiddha, practices that do not belong to bhakti proper but that become so through association with bhakti; and svarupa-siddhā, actions that are directly constituted of bhakti by their very nature. Svarupa-siddha-bhakti, even if undertaken by an ignorant person, can deliver the ultimate result. These three categories of bhakti have two further divisions of sakaitava (with ulterior motive) and akaitava (devoid of ulterior motive). If one executes devotion with the sole purpose of attaining love of God, such devotion is akaitavā. If, however, one harbors some other motive as the goal, it is called sakaitavā. 
Aropa-siddha basically amounts to the offering of one's karma to Bhagavan. Sanga-siddha is a mixed form of devotion. The mixture could be with karma, or jñana, or both. Karma-misrā sanga-siddhā is of three types, namely, sakāmā (with a desire for material enjoyment), kaivalya-kāmā (with a desire for liberation), and bhaktimātra-kāmā (with a desire for bhakti alone). Jñana-miśra sangasiddha is undertaken either with a desire for liberation (kaivalyakāmā) or with a desire for bhakti alone (bhakti-matra-kāmā). These types of devotion are tainted with the material gunas. In contrast, however, svarupa-siddha-bhakti, also called akiñcană, is completely 
xxxvi 
Introduction 
transcendental. It is causeless and unobstructed. The mind of a devotee who is established in svarupa-siddha-bhakti naturally flows toward Bhagavan. This category of bhakti is constituted of direct devotional practices, such as hearing, chanting, and remembering the name, form, attributes, and pastimes of Bhagavan. 
Svarupa-siddha-bhakti has two primary divisions, namely, vaidhi and rāgānugā. Vaidhī-bhakti is impelled by scriptural injunctions. It includes the practices of surrender (saraṇāpatti), service to pure devotees (sat-sanga), and the nine primary limbs of devotion, beginning with hearing and singing the name, form, qualities, and liläs of Bhagavan. In modern times, people are averse to the very idea of surrender. They think that by surrendering to a guru or Bhagavan, they would lose their independence. Surrender is considered a weakness of character and oppressive. As a consequence, everyone wishes to be free and independent. In reality, however, as long as human beings are conditioned by their karma, there is no true independence. They remain slaves of their mind and senses. Under such circumstances, it is pure delusion to think that one is independent. Bhakti, on the other hand, liberates the practitioner from the conditioning of karma and awards true freedom. Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī explains that surrender involves the resolve to act favorably and to desist from doing anything unfavorable to Bhagavan, to have faith that Bhagavan will offer protection, to accept Him as one's protector, to submit oneself to Him, and to embrace the spirit of humility. Surrender is the basic foundation of bhakti. 
Śri Jiva Gosvāmi stresses the association of and service to pure devotees of Bhagavan. He makes it clear that association with devotees is an independent means of attaining perfection. In India, traditionally it is a custom to have darśana of sadhus. One of the purposes and advantages of visiting holy places like Vṛndāvana is to obtain the association of devotees, since devotees commonly reside there. This is also the intention behind religious festivals, such as kumbha-mela, where sadhus from all over India gather and set up camp to avail their association to pilgrims. 
xxxvii 
Introduction 
The primary limbs of bhakti practiced by devotees are nine, popularly called navadha-bhakti. These include hearing, singing, and remembering the name, form, qualities, and pastimes of Bhagavan, service to His feet, worship of the deity, offering obeisance, considering oneself as a servant, considering oneself as a friend, and selfsurrender. Of all these limbs, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī specifically emphasizes the importance of kirtana in the present age of Kali. Namajapa and nama-kirtana are the specialty of the followers of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. 
Between the two divisions of bhakti, namely, vaidhi and rāgānūgā, the latter is superior. It is the hallmark of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Rāgānugā is based upon natural attraction for Bhagavän, just as the senses are naturally attracted to their corresponding sense objects. The eternal associates of Bhagavan are naturally attracted to Him eternally. Their devotion is called rāgātmikā, referring to those whose authentic self is permeated by rāga for Bhagavan. Since these associates are naturally and eternally endowed with such constitutional devotion, their bhakti does not fall under the category of practice, sadhana. On the other hand, the bhakti of those who have developed a liking (ruci) for such rāgātmikā-bhakti --although not yet having attained rāga - and who follow the mood (bhāva) of a specific rāgātmika-bhakta, is called rāgānugā, lit., "bhakti that follows the way of raga." 
Rāgānugâ is much more powerful than vaidhi, because it is based on natural attraction. It does not depend on any scriptural injunction. Because dharmic people in general are accustomed to have faith in and follow scriptural injunctions, it is difficult for them to comprehend rāgānuga-bhakti. They consider any act not prescribed by scripture as adharmic. Anticipating a possible objection to rāgānugā from this point of view, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi shows how rāgānuga-bhakti is the essence of dharma. Although it is not impelled by scriptural injunctions, it is certainly not opposed to scripture. Just as love is not a feeling that can be enjoined or forced upon another person, so too rāgānuga-bhakti cannot be thrust upon someone by scriptural injunctions. Rules are made for those who are not naturally inclined to follow dharma. But rules serve no 
Xxxviii 
Introduction 
purpose for a person endowed with natural attraction. The behavior of such a person naturally accords with scriptural rules, even without the need of being impelled by them. 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi makes the point that rāgānuga-bhakti is primarily for Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. The eternal residents of Vraja are the exemplars for rāgānuga-bhakti. There are four devotional moods in which the Vraja residents relate with Krsna, namely, as a servant, a friend, a parent, or an amorous lover. Out of these, the lovers are the best. Among them, Śrī Rādhā is supreme. Rādha's love for Kṛṣṇa is the epitome of bhakti. This is the essential message of Bhagavata Purana. Attaining the love that follows Radha's bhāva is the highest perfection of human life. In Priti Sandarbha, the final volume of the anthology, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi examines this love in an elaborate manner, basing his analysis particularly on the Tenth Canto of Bhagavata Purāņa. 
A Brief Summary of Bhakti Sandarbha 
The book is divided into 340 anucchedas. Each anuccheda is pivoted around a principal verse from the Bhāgavata Purana. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī does not give any titles to the anucchedas or make any explicit divisions or chapters, but he does provide numerous clues throughout the text regarding the thematic division of topics. On the basis of these clues that have been carefully gleaned from the text, the titles and chapters have been formulated for the easy comprehension of the reader. As mentioned by Śrī Jiva himself in the beginning of Anuccheda 179, the whole book is conceived as having three divisions. The first division comprises Anucchedas 1-178. It deals with the topic of bhakti as the complete method of spiritual attainment (abhidheya). It is further divided into three chapters namely, the establishment of bhakti as the complete abhidheya (Anucchedas 1-120), the essential nature of bhakti (Anucchedas 121164), and pure devotion, which culminates in natural attraction for Bhagavan (Anucchedas 165-178). 
The second division consists of Anucchedas 179-213. It deals primarily with the supreme nature of the devotees of Bhagavan, who 
xxxixIntroduction 
are identified as the sole cause of attaining bhakti. This division also contains three chapters. In the first chapter (Anucchedas 179-187.1), Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī shows that bhakti is obtained only by the association of devotees. There is no other means of acquiring bhakti. In the second chapter (Anucchedas 187.2-202.2), he describes the characteristics of three gradations of Bhagavan's devotees, dwelling in particular on those of the most highly elevated devotees. In the third chapter (Anucchedas 202.3-213), Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi demonstrates the sadhaka's stages of progression along the path of bhakti that occur only by the grace of devotees. 
The third and final division of the book consists of Anucchedas 214-340. In this part of the book, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi elaborates on the practice of bhakti. It can be divided into five chapters. The first chapter (Anucchedas 214-216) gives a brief introduction to the subject of direct worship. It also defines the intrinsic and extrinsic nature of bhakti. The second chapter (Anucchedas 217-234) describes the three categories of bhakti referred to above, namely, attributive (āropa-siddhā), associative (sanga-siddhā), and inherent (svarupa-siddha). It also describes three types of bhakti enacted by practitioners who are still under the influence of the three material gunas. In the third chapter (Anucchedas 235-309), Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi mentions two divisions of inherent bhakti, namely, vaidhi and rāgānuga. The first of these is described in this chapter, and the second, in the fourth chapter (Anucchedas 310-338). The fifth chapter (Anucchedas 339-340) simply consists of the author's concluding remarks. Śrī Jīva stresses the importance of keeping one's realizations confidential. They should not be disclosed to anyone. In the last anuccheda, he summarizes the various stages on the path of bhakti, beginning with the association of devotees. The stages of development may vary from person to person. He concludes the exposition of bhakti with a prayer to Radha and Kṛṣṇa. 
xl 
Introduction 
Salient Principles Established in Bhakti Sandarbha 
1. Bhakti is the means as well as the end. 
2. Bhakti is superior to mukti. The bliss of bhakti is superior to the 
realization of Brahman. 
3. The living entity's natural constitution is to be a servant of Bhagavan. Therefore, bhakti is for all, regardless of birth, gender, age, or nationality. 
4. Bhakti is the most natural process for the living beings. 
5. Bhakti is not limited to any specific act, such as hearing and 
chanting about Bhagavan. It is all-inclusive. 
6. The complete vision of the Absolute is possible only by bhakti. The processes of jñāna and yoga provide only partial disclosures. 7. Bhakti establishes a relation with Bhagavan. 
8. Without bhakti, the practices of karma, jñāna, and yoga cannot bestow their respective results. Bhakti, however, is supremely independent, and hence it does not depend on any other process to award its result. 
9. Bhakti is not inherent in the living beings. It descends by the 
grace of a devotee or Bhagavan. 
10. Bhakti is the intrinsic potency of Bhagavan, distinct from the 
extrinsic as well as the intermediary potencies. 
11. Bhakti controls even Bhagavan, meaning that He becomes 
devoted to His bhakta. 
12. Bhaktas are the topmost human beings, superior even to brahmanas. Even a moment's association with a bhakta is superior to liberation. 
13. Ahangrahopăsană is not recommended for bhaktas. 
14. Pranava is the mahā-väkya for the bhaktas. 
15. Sat-sanga, or association with a pure devotee, is the root cause of attaining pure devotion. Sat-sanga uproots the living entity's beginningless ignorance and grants immediate awareness of Bhagavan. 
16. Śraddha is the only qualification required for the execution of 
devotion. 
17. Sraddha is not a limb of bhakti proper but an attribute of a 
devotee. 
xli 
Introduction 
18. A bhakta transcends the adhikara, or eligibility, for the path of 
karma. Thus, a bhakta does not incur any sin if he gives up his nitya and naimittika duties. He does not need to undergo any 
atonement. 
19. Offenses are the greatest obstacle on the path of devotion. 20. Continuous chanting of the name eradicates offenses. 
21. Even a semblance of bhakti destroys all sins and can grant union 
with Bhagavan. Brahma-jñana cannot lead to such a result. 22. The devas, such as Śiva, should not be worshiped as independent gods but as devotees or as existential seats of Bhagavan's abidance. They should never be disrespected. 
Importance of Bhakti Sandarbha 
To engage in bhakti, one has to have the proper understanding of one's relation with Bhagavan. One has to know that one is an integrated part of Bhagavan and not absolutely identical with Brahman, as is understood by the radical nondualists (the Advaita Vedāntīs). Although the living beings and Bhagavan are one in terms of consciousness, a distinction exists between them not only in the phenomenal state but even in the liberated state. The relation between them is thus one of transrational oneness and distinction (acintya-bheda-abheda), which is the inherent nature of the relation between potency (śakti) and potent source (saktimān). This in brief is the "integral nonduality" propounded in Śrimad Bhāgavata. Pure bhakti is not possible without this understanding. 
With this view in mind, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi composed the earlier Sandarbhas to elaborately explain the relation between the jiva and Bhagavan. These Sandarbhas are meant to be studied in the order given by the author, otherwise the complete understanding of Reality will remain beyond the practitioner's grasp, which will in turn obscure the practice of suddha-bhakti. And if bhakti is thus obstructed or adulterated, it will not directly disclose Bhagavan and prema to the practitioner, which is the whole purpose of undertaking the investigation into Reality in the first place. In Śrī Jiva's ordered exposition, Bhakti Sandarbha stands out as the pivot or the 
xlii 
Introduction 
center of all the Sandarbhas. The first four provide the theoretical underpinnings that lead to it, and the last one elucidates its outcome in the form of divine love (priti). Bhakti Sandarbha is also the most practically oriented out of the complete set, because it provides the method to be followed in one's life. As far as a sadhaka is concerned, the other five offer only a theoretical understanding, which is however essential for authentic practice. Thus, although each of the other Sandarbhas have their own specific role and importance, ultimately it is only Bhakti Sandarbha that is the beacon light in one's day-to-day life. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance for a sincere sădhaka. 
For the reasons just stated, anyone who is serious about becoming a pure devotee of Bhagavan, especially of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, must study Bhakti Sandarbha thoroughly. Along with Bhakti Sandarbha, it will also be beneficial to study the Eastern division of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmi's Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. This will provide an in-depth understanding of pure devotion, which is not an easy subject to comprehend. These two books are complementary and cover most of the theoretical and practical aspects of devotion. Bhaktirasāmṛta-sindhu deals with the practical as well as with the emotional aspect of bhakti. The Eastern division enumerates the first aspect and the remaining three divisions, namely, Southern, Western, and Northern, deal with the second aspect. Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi, however, deals with these two aspects of bhakti separately in Bhakti Sandarbha and Priti Sandarbha, respectively. What is described in a very terse form in the Eastern division of Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu has been elaborated in Bhakti Sandarbha. The former, being composed in sloka form, has its limitations, and needs the help of a commentary to understand the subject matter. Bhakti Sandarbha is not subject to the same limitation. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī makes the subject easier to comprehend. 
Bhakti Sandarbha places bhakti on the highest pedestal, which it rightly deserves. Earlier, bhakti was considered only as a means for liberation. Śri Jiva Gosvāmi, however, on the strength of scriptural authority, establishes that bhakti is the supreme process as well as the ultimate goal. All other processes cease after delivering their 
xliii 
Introduction 
respective results, but bhakti continues even beyond videha-mukti, or ultimate liberation. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi goes on to say that without the grace of bhakti, all other processes are impotent. Bhakti, being the intrinsic potency of Bhagavan, is complete by itself and does not depend upon anything. It was propagated by Bhagavan Himself at the beginning of creation. Whatever a person wishes to attain -material or spiritual - can be attained through bhakti. Everyone is eligible to engage in bhakti irrespective of their status, gender, age, nationality, or education. Only bhakti awards direct realization of Bhagavan. Indeed, Bhagavan becomes controlled by His devotee. 
All auspicious qualities become naturally manifest in a devotee. The realization of Brahman is possible only by the grace of bhakti. Even a semblance of bhakti can award liberation. The only obstacles to bhakti are the offenses, and therefore they must be conscientiously avoided. They have been elaborately discussed in Bhakti Sandarbha. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī also describes the influence of offenses. This is highly practical knowledge for a practitioner. One can examine one's own mind to see if one is progressing or regressing because of offenses. Śri Jiva Gosvāmi also offers advice as to how to mitigate the offenses committed in the past or in the present life. Bhakti is the most blissful process both in the stage of practice as well as in the perfected stage. 
These characteristics of bhakti highlighted in Bhakti Sandarbha are unique. It is crucial to understand all these points to uproot all doubts about the nature and efficacy of bhakti. Because of the popularity of other paths in the past, a sadhaka may have deeply formed samskāras about the importance of other processes and may, thus, knowingly or unknowingly harbor doubts or lack faith in bhakti. Doubts and lack of faith dampen one's enthusiasm to engage in bhakti wholeheartedly. Worse yet is that one may act in an offensive manner that will completely obstruct one's progress. It is thus of the utmost importance for a sincere sadhaka to study Bhakti Sandarbha. It is recommended that a serious practitioner should study a part of this book regularly, just as one would commit to other devotional practices, such as chanting the names of Kṛṣṇa. By doing so, one's understanding of bhakti becomes more and more refined, 
xliv 
Introduction 
which results in a corresponding increase in the purity and fixity of one's practice. This is the whole point of Bhakti Sandarbha. 
Division of the Book into Two Volumes 
Because of the length of this work, Bhakti Sandarbha has been divided into two volumes, the first volume containing parts one and two of Śrī Jiva's text, and the second, the third and final part. The second volume also contains all the references, including glossary, subject index, verse index, and bibliography. Due to this division, it has been necessary to adopt a concordant numbering system wherever page references are given in the two books. A Roman numeral (either 1 or 11), followed by a period, is placed before the page number to indicate in which volume the reference occurs. In volume 1, this system was necessary only for the "Contents at a Glance" page, where these numerals appear in the right hand column. In volume II, the same system has been applied for the "Contents at a Glance" page and throughout the subject and verse indexes. 
xlv 
