+++
title = "04"

+++


4. Not in the symbol; for (the symbol) is not that one (i.e. the Self of the Devotee).

'Let a man meditate on mind as Brahman ' (Cḥ. Up. III, 18, 1); 'He who meditates on name as Brahman' (Cḥ. Up. VII, l5)--with regard to these and similar meditations on outward symbols (pratīka) of Brahman there arises a doubt, viz. whether in them the symbols are to be thought of as of the nature of Self or not. The Pūrvapakshin

holds the former view. For, he says, in form those injunctions do not differ from other injunctions of meditation on Brahman, and Brahman, as we have seen, constitutes the Self of the meditating Devotee.--This view the Sūtra sets aside. A pratīka cannot be meditated on as being of the nature of Self; for the pratīka is not the Self of the meditating Devotee. What, in those meditations, is to be meditated upon is the pratīka only, not Brahman: the latter enters into the meditation only as qualifying its aspect. For by a meditation on a pratīka we understand a meditation in which something that is not Brahman is viewed under the aspect of Brahman, and as the pratīka--the object of meditation--is not the Self of the Devotee it cannot be viewed under that form.--But an objection is raised here also, it is Brahman which is the real object of meditation; for where Brahman _may_ be viewed as the object of meditation, it is inappropriate to assume as objects non-sentient things of small power such as the mind, and so on. The object of meditation therefore is Brahman viewed under the aspect of mind, and so on.--This objection the next Sūtra disposes of.

