+++
title = "00 Introduction - Spacetime and Its Display"

+++





A brief review of ideas discussed in chapter 2 may at this point be useful. As we noted there, the Bhagavan’s body of ever-changing matter is like the human body with both gross and subtle modes, except that the Bhagavan’s bodies are endlessly varied. The gross body is manifest to human eyes, while the subtle body is not. In the case of both God and humans, the Self \(*atman*\) of pure consciousness and eternal being gazes into the world through the sense organs of those subtle and gross bodies. Made of matter, those bodies are always in flux. In the case of humans, that flux causes the Self to misperceive itself, but in the case of God, he is never fooled; even while he plays the game of illusion, part of Narayana watches the game, transcendent to it all. Narayana is both actor and audience in his lila.

Narayana, we recall, is pure consciousness that is innately creative. Out of the sheer joy of play, Narayana becomes Vasudeva, the supreme Father, and Goddess Sri Lakshmi, the supreme Mother. Narayana is now Light blazing with two dimensions “inside” himself: One is the perceiver, the other is the perceived; one is knowledge, the other is matter. The dimension of knowledge \(Vasudeva\) then allows the dimension of matter \(Sri Lakshmi\) to envelop its “center”; she produces the “formation” \(*vyuha*\) of Vasudeva with a dark \(*krishna*\) body. Nothing yet exists, however, because Narayana has not yet produced a “thing” of name-and-form \(*namarupa*\).

The dark Vasudeva formation at Narayana’s “center” is now the place of action. By means of the enveloping Goddess, the Vasudeva formation rearranges himself in a sequence that produces “things,” culminating in the fantastic yet orderly complexity that is his body and our universe. As each formation appears, Vasudeva’s omniscient Light reveals itself as tinted by the Goddess: Purity appears as white, passion appears as red, and defilement appears as dark.

There are three sets of sequences. The first set produces Vasudeva with a face in every direction. That is Vasudeva’s Self enveloped by matter. The second set produces a subtle material body for that Self. The third set produces a gross body for that subtle body. The vimana of the Emperor’s Vishnu-house replicates all three sets and bodies in the following ways:

1.On the vimana’s bottom floor, Vasudeva as omniscient knowledge \(*jnana*\) embodied in black gazes out through openings in its four sides, the way the embodied Self of the human gazes out through the sense organs of the human body. Although its purity is white, it appears to us as black stone.

2.On the vimana’s middle floor, Vasudeva is dominated by the passion that tints his Light red. He reclines in his subtle body and dreams all that ever has and ever will emerge from his sovereignty \(*aishvarya*\), which include his embodied life as the universe and his avataras descending into it. He reclines on a snake the way the human fetus reclines within the placenta, recollecting all its lives. Although its passion is red, it too appears to us a black stone.

3.On the vimana’s top floor, Vasudeva is transformed into his complete descent into spacetime as Krishna; he stands inside his own gross body of spacetime in a gross body of his own. Tinted dark blue \(*nila*\) in the Dvapara Yuga when he lived, his stone body in the Kali Yuga is black \(*krishna*\).

The black stone icon that once stood in that top sanctum was believed to embody Vasudeva’s potency \(*shakti*\). Brilliant conquering power \(*tejas*\) was believed to emit from it to conquer Nandivarman’s enemies. That tejas appeared as the golden Goddess Chandika Durga and her angry emanation, the black Goddess Kali. The poet Kalikanri described that standing icon in the ninth stanza of his poem: “Pinnai’s forehead is a / Gleaming crescent moon / And she’s a cousin, / So long ago in battle / He subdued deceiving Lust / In the shape of seven bulls, / And now owns beautiful Kacci // Where the Sovereign of Pallavas / Serves the Vishnu-house he built / after he conquered those / angry kings with swords / stained black from blood / As the Emperor who owns / The Drum with a bitter mouth / And the Conch with the roar of the sea” \(*PT* 2.9.9\). Kalikanri has used the seven bulls conquered by Krishna to win Pinnai to represent the final events in Nandivarman’s conquest of the Pandya-led alliance that opposed him as Kanchi’s ruler. His conch and drum, which were named in the prakara inscription describing his consecration as Kanchipuram’s “Indra,” appear here in rites of war; conveyed through their sound, tejas defeated that alliance and brought Nandivarman to a secure throne as Bhagavata emperor.

In this stanza, Kalikanri cryptically recorded the belief that the standing Krishna icon in the top sanctum of the Emperor’s Vishnu-house was shakti, the source of the tejas that enabled Nandivarman to prevail. Tejas appears here as Pinnai. Early Tamil Bhagavatas apparently believed that Goddess Chandika Durga, who embodies tejas, had taken a cowherd form to marry the cowherd Krishna. In a seventh-century rock-cut shrine in Mamallapuram, Pinnai stands next to Krishna as he holds up the mountain Govardhana to shield Gokula from Indra’s rains, thereby illustrating the murti name Govinda, “Indra of Cows.” As Indra’s sovereign, the cowherd boy is sovereign over all devas \(Hudson 1982\). It was because the standing Krishna icon embodied shakti that sculptors depicted it as an icon standing in a battle scene on the prakara; the icon is rigid as stone, yet its explosive power throws the soldiers surrounding it into the air \(Figure 4.8\). Kalikanri’s identification of that icon as the cowherd who had won Pinnai as bride revealed it as the embodiment of shakti: Krishna’s male potency \(*shakti*\) by itself was incomplete; living as the Unobstructed among humans, Govinda was fully himself only when joined to his female conquering power \(*tejas*\) \(Hudson 2001b\).

Its potency explains why the standing icon was intentionally difficult to reach. It stood in the inner and hidden part of the vimana on the top floor, and only by climbing a ladder could one get to it. The top sanctum was not meant for general visitation; there is no circumambulatory around it and there are no sculptures on its exterior. Those who conquered Nandivarman’s descendents at the end of the ninth century, believing the icon to be the source of Pallava conquering power, may have taken it to their own domain where it has disappeared to historical memory.



## **The Depiction of Spacetime**

The depiction of spacetime logically belongs on the small top sanctum, but it is not there. Rather, the temple’s designers placed it on the much larger bottom floor. The depiction appears in two places: on the vimana wall surrounding the bottom sanctum, facing outward toward the enclosing prakara wall; and on the prakara wall itself, facing inward toward the vimana. That arrangement is immediately obvious to visitors entering through the prakara gateway. They see sculpted forms of the Bhagavan directly in front of them on the porch, and they see the beginning of Pallava history on the prakara to their left with its culmination in Nandivarman’s rule on the prakara to their right.

That arrangement made a theological point about time and place. The Bhagavan’s gaze, it said visually, ruled the Pallava Dynasty at Kanchi from its beginning. Moreover, his most significant instrument of rule was Nandivarman II Pallavamalla, who built the Vishnu-house as a place where he could bow down to his master. The sculptures along the entire south wall and the southern half of the west wall, which depict events in Nandivarman’s reign beginning with his accession about fifty years earlier, illustrated that theology. Through openings in the outer wall of the vimana on the bottom floor—through openings in his gross body, that is—Vasudeva gazes from his hidden realm across the moat in the four directions, and his gaze falls on the entire Pallava Dynasty from its inception. His Unobstructed formation, however, looks southward directly onto Nandivarman’s sculpted history. Through an ever-watchful gaze, that arrangement says, Vasudeva caused the Pallavas to do his will, moving them from the outside as External Controller and from the inside as Inner Controller, just as a puppeteer moves his puppets \(*BG* 18.61\). Most especially, it also says, he directed his protective gaze toward his faithful emperor, Nandivarman II Pallavamalla, who built this Vishnu-house for him.

That arrangement also revealed distinctions within God. When the designers enclosed the three vertical sanctums by means of the vimana wall and porch, and then enclosed that entire “mountain” with the prakara wall, it divided Narayana’s hidden dimensions from his public dimensions. The sculpted panels of the prakara and the vimana can be seen by anyone qualified to enter through the gate on the west, but the panels on the sanctums inside the vimana are not visible to any except those who cross the moat, enter, and climb the stairs. Perhaps in Nandivarman’s day, entrance to the public realm of the temple was restricted to an elite among whom some were allowed entrance to its hidden realm.

By moving spacetime’s depiction from the small top sanctum to the expansive walls of the vimana and porch enclosing the bottom sanctum, the designers had ample room to depict the Bhagavan’s gross body in great detail. Now they could comfortably follow Shuka’s advice about studying God: “Once the mind knows the Lord’s manifest form woven of material threads then it may enter into the *brahman* beyond the threads, who is hidden, self-luminous, and transcendent, the Bhagavan known as Vasudeva” \(*BP* 5.16.3\). First learn about his gross form, and then about his subtle form; after establishing the mind in the gross, then lead it to the subtle \(*BP* 5.26.39\).

That movement, from God’s gross body to God’s subtle body, is exactly the way visitors move through the Vishnu-house. Walking clockwise, visitors turn left at the entrance to walk along the covered pathway paralleling the prakara. Looking to the right and across the moat as they walk around the vimana, they see sculpted panels on the west, north, east, and south walls. What they do not see easily, however, are the sculpted formations on the sides of the bottom sanctum gazing out through vimana windows toward them. Nevertheless, sculpted panels on the vimana depict the respective identities of those formations through subtle numerical symbols.

Each corner panel that faces north \(Panels N1 and N6\) depicts a single major figure to represent the Plower as the first of Vasudeva’s formations. The corner panels that face east \(Panels E1 and E6\) are composed of double parts to represent the Pre-eminently Mighty as the second formation. The corner panels that face south \(Panels S1 and S6\) depict scenes composed of triple parts to represent the Unobstructed as the third formation.

Even if those numerical signs are understood, however, visitors find it difficult to recognize and read the mapping of spacetime on the vimana and porch, because the structural elements of the universe are depicted not as natural objects but rather as the bodily forms of characters in narratives. The designers appear to have followed another piece of advice from Shuka, this time about literature: “If a work of art reveals the presence of God, even if it is imperfect, it will not attract crows but hamsas”—geese signifying acute mental discrimination \(*BP* 12.12.45–52\). Since the universe is a body that refers beyond itself to the Supreme Self as its origin, sustainer, and destroyer, the vimana depicts the natural world as it would be seen by people of unusual discrimination. Its audience is sophisticated Bhagavatas. Consequently, visitors today will not recognize what they see as a consistent and complex mapping of the Bhagavan’s gross body of spacetime unless they already know the Bhagavata Dharma well.

It makes sense that the designers of a “private chapel” for a Bhagavata emperor had in mind worshipers who would be sophisticates learned in Bhagavata lore. They designed the sculpted panels not to educate the ignorant but to aid the visualizations of the learned. The sculpted panels must have functioned for their worship the way Tamil and Sanskrit poems do: they point beyond the immediate image to numerous other images and stories, each echoing other stories and other meanings, all finally referring to the Speaker whose utterance is cosmos and history. As Kalikanri said in the first stanza of his poem about the temple, they refer to “the Speaker” who is “the substance of the words He speaks.” Through stone, plaster, and paint, the vimana illustrated what worshipers longed to see directly through visualization: that all of space and all of time refer in the end to Vasudeva Krishna.

According to the *Bhagavata Purana*, the Bhagavan in his Unobstructed formation taught his firstborn son, Brahma, how to organize his body and the lotus into the universe, and Brahma passed that information on to others. It was transmitted through scriptures, notably through the *Bhagavata Purana*, whose portions are portrayed more than once on the vimana itself. Following that teaching, the designers mapped the cosmos by means of thirty panels in a sequence that begins immediately north of the porch’s western doorway and proceeds clockwise \(see Figure 11.2 below for an identification of those panels\). Before turning to those panels in the next chapter, let us first examine spacetime’s organization. It differs radically, of course, from conventional modern notions.



## ******The Organization of Spacetime**

Brahma turned his lotus and body into the “Brahma sphere” \(*brahmanda*\) and it became the inverse of our bodies. Whereas the human’s gross body envelops a subtle body that in turn envelops the Self, Brahma’s gross body exists at his center. His subtle body surrounds that gross body, and in turn his Self surrounds his subtle body. For us, the Light that provides our consciousness exists as the Self in our center, in our “heart”; our darkly ignorant wakeful ego exists in the material bodies surrounding it. In the case of Brahma, however, his Light exists on his periphery, and his darkly ignorant wakeful ego exists at his material center. In cosmography, it resides on the top of Mount Meru.

Moreover, whether Brahma is awake or asleep, his body exists “inside” Vasudeva and never leaves. Brahma is not born *out* of the womb in the way we are, but *in* it. Brahma as spacetime may therefore be imagined as a fetus waking and sleeping within the chorion and placenta, which exist inside the uterus behind the mother’s navel. In the iconography of the middle-floor sanctum, the chorion and placenta containing Brahma are represented as the dark waters in which the Unobstructed sleeps on the Plower as snake, immersed in Pre-eminently Mighty’s impassioned consciousness. The uterus holding all of that belongs to Goddess Sri Lakshmi, the Mother. She is Vasudeva’s womb, the “great *brahman*” \(*mahad brahma*\) into which he plants the embryo to bring forth all things \(*BG* 14.3–4\). When, as in the bottom sanctum, the Father is visualized as a single body of light, the Mother is there as the lotus womb behind his navel.

The *Bhagavata Purana* describes the dimensions of space and the rhythms of time within the womb of “great *brahman*” in considerable detail \(*BP* 5.16–26; 2.5–6\). The following is a summary.



### ***Brahma within the Pure Waters***

A vertical axis pierces directional space at its center to link fourteen worlds, from Satyaloka at the top to Patala at the bottom. Midway along that axis the earth \(*bhu* or *bhumi*\) spreads out horizontally, from the center toward a circular boundary. The fourteen worlds \(*loka*\) arrange themselves vertically in sets of seven, one set above earth and one set beneath it. Earth herself is the dense and “energetic” \(*rajasika*\) mode of Vasudeva’s “power of becoming” \(*bhutishakti*\). She is worshiped as Goddess Earth \(*Bhudevi* or *Bhumidevi*\), who designates all the matter of spacetime. Her most gross or dense mode is the element called earth \(*prithvi*\). The worlds above the earth are composed of her matter in its “pure” \(*sattvika*\) modes; and the worlds below earth are composed of her matter in its “deluded” \(*tamasika*\) modes.

Lying in the middle of space \(*akasha*\), earth divides horizontally into seven concentric circles of land separated by a liquid. At an earlier period of the kalpa, she had spread out as a single whole, but Brahma’s grandson, King Priyavarta, circumambulated the center of space in a chariot seven times and left the earth with seven ruts. They then filled with liquids and formed concentric continents around concentric oceans. The continents \(*dvipa*\), which have liquids on both sides, are inhabited by embodied souls \(*jiva*\). They extend from densely material Jambu at earth’s dark center to its shining edge; that edge is made of “space” \(*akasha*\), the finest mode of matter. In size, each continent is twice the size of the one it encompasses \(*BP* 5.1.30–35\). Each of the seven worlds above the earth matches a world below the earth, and the earth in turn matches each of those with a continent.

Pushkara links earth to the highest upper world, Satyaloka, and to the lowest world, Patala \(*BP* 3.9.18\). The Manasottara mountain range runs along its center, and at each cardinal direction stands a city belonging to the guardian of that direction \(*lokapala*\). Indra possesses the city Devadhani in the east, Yama possesses the city Samyamani in the south, Varuna possesses the city Nimlochani in the west, and Soma \(the Moon\) possesses the city Vibhavari in the north \(*BP* 5.21.7\). Four elephants standing on the Lokaloka mountain range, which lies beyond Pushkara and encloses it, define those directions.1 Those elephants align with eight cities on eight mountains at Earth’s center, which surround Brahma on Mount Meru. Four of those eight cities belong to the world-protectors already noted at the cardinal directions, and four belong to the lokapalas at the intermediate directions \(*BP* 5.16.29\). Those eight protectors are the material forms of the eight directions \(*dinmurti*\): Indra is east, Agni is southeast, Yama is south, Nirrti is southwest, Varuna is west, Vayu is northwest, Kubera is north, and Ishana is northeast \(Smith 1980: 41\).

Horizontally, the earth, from Meru at its center to Pushkara at its outer edge, forms a symmetrical mandala of squares and circles. Enclosed by Lokaloka and its pure waters, it is like a lotus blossom rising above the waters in a pond, fully open to the light of the sun. But like a fetus in the placenta, those same waters envelop it as it lies awake, moving within the womb of the Mother. Both metaphors make a crucial point: Spacetime, as the ever-moving universe \(*jagat*\) woven of matter, propelled by passion, and governed by time, is constantly in motion. But its components move at differing speeds. The “sphere of Brahma” \(*brahmanda*\) is like a seven-layered ball of luminescent matter constantly in motion. Each layer envelops the center with increasing darkness until the core of materialized light is so dense it appears to be inert earth \(*prithvi*\).

In this cosmography, humans in the Kali Yuga normally have direct physical access only to a small portion of the earth: to one-ninth of the central continent Jambu, south of mount Meru, and to the sea of salt that borders it. They have no direct access to the other inhabited continents, nor to the worlds above or below. There are, of course, exceptions.

In sum, our universe may be thought of as a fetus-like sphere, an open lotus, floating in an inconceivably huge pond of pure water contained in a placenta-like envelope at the center of God. Although that sphere is the entire body \(subtle and gross\) of Brahma when he is awake, for the Bhagavan it is only his gross body \(e.g., *BP* 2.1.26–39 and 2.5.36–42\).

The senses and thoughts of humans are confined to its limits. The sense organs that allow for touching, tasting, smelling, hearing, and seeing function only in the immediate area of the earth; even the extremely fine sense organ of the mind cannot penetrate beyond the mountain range on the earth’s outer-most continent called “Beyond the Mind” \(Manasottara\). Nor can it pierce through the upper “Realm of True Being” \(Satyaloka\), nor through the lower realm of the “Fallen” \(Patala\). Our only source of accurate knowledge about reality beyond the reach of the senses is Brahma’s teaching, which he passed down through the seers and sages.

The six material layers \(*kosha*\) surrounding the seventh layer, the central continent of Jambu, make Jambu the densest portion of spacetime, while the outermost layer is the finest \(*BP* 2.2.28\). Not even Brahma has been able to pierce that akasha edge, because it is the boundary of himself. According to the *Bhagavata Purana*, the only being other than Krishna and Arjuna to have pierced the outer edge of Brahma’s body from the inside is Vishnu. As Dwarf standing on earth, Vishnu stepped upward and put the nail of his left toe through spacetime’s dome; ever since, the pure waters in which it floats have been flowing through the hole down to earth as the Ganga River. The Ganga is thus the source of undefiled purity. She received that purity from the saffron she washed off Dwarf’s foot when she bathed it on her way down through the cosmos. Ganga descends by way of Vishnupada, the Seven Seers, Moon, and Brahma’s city on Mount Meru \(*BP* 5.17.1–5\).

Beyond the enormous pond of pure water from which Ganga flows, and in which Brahma’s body floats, lies the ultimate limit of directional space and chronological time. In regard to the horizontal earth, that limit is a mountain range enclosing a fantastically wide circular region that includes everything. The mountain range separates directional space \(*loka*\) from space that is beyond directions \(*aloka*\), and is therefore called Lokaloka \(*BP* 5.20–36\). As noted, four elephants standing there define and stabilize the directions that organize the space within.

The mountainous wall of Lokaloka is so high that it reaches the realm of the pole star Dhruva. No light from the sun penetrates beyond it, and anything that manages to get beyond it dissolves. Only masters of unified consciousness \(*yoga*\) who can go beyond the limits of mental thought, it is said, can visually penetrate Lokaloka to see a “region” beyond that is difficult to imagine. It lies beyond the directions of space, it is golden, it shines like a mirror, and it encompasses directional space by a “size” equal in width to the entire realm of bounded space from its center at Mount Meru to its Lokaloka edge \(*BP* 5.20.34–42\). That golden realm of nondirectional space is the Mother’s womb; it holds the placental Lokaloka in which Brahma, her son, lives out his days and nights in its pure waters.

Within the “pond” of pure waters created by Lokaloka, Brahma lives a life of one hundred years. His years are made up of days and nights measured by his waking and sleeping. When he is awake, the cosmos appears; when he is asleep, it disappears. As Krishna told Arjuna: “Know that a day of Brahma lasts one thousand ages \(*yuga*\), and a night one thousand ages; people who know that know a day-and-night \(*ahoratra*\). At the beginning of the day, all manifest things spring forth from the unmanifest; at the beginning of night they dissolve into that which is known as unmanifest. The assembly of living beings \(*bhutagrama*\) thus comes into existence over and over, and as night begins it dissolves, O son of Prithu, springing forth at the beginning of day” \(*BG* 8.17–19\).

When Brahma sleeps, his body dissolves into the finest mode of matter, space \(*akasha*\); in an unmanifest mode its is said to sleep inside a closed lotus blossom in the pure waters enclosed by Lokaloka. When Brahma wakes up, the lotus blossom opens, the universe of spacetime emerges from the various parts of the lotus and his body, and Brahma begins his waking day. Floating in the pure waters inside Lokaloka, his ego consciousness resides on Mount Meru.

But Brahma does not live his life autonomously. Since he is the rebirth of Vasudeva by means of the Goddess, his father rules him through his mother. Krishna explained it this way: “All this moving universe is pervaded by me with an unmanifest form: all beings stand in me, and I do not stand in them. \[Yet\] beings do not stand in me, behold my unified consciousness that is sovereign \(*yogam aishvaram*\): Supporting beings and \[yet\] not standing in beings, my Self is the origin of beings. Just as the great wind stands in space and goes always and everywhere, so all beings stand in me; thus you should understand it” \(*BG* 9:4–6\). Here, if we understand space \(*akasha*\) to be the Satyaloka edge of Brahma’s body, then the great wind \(*vayu*\) ceaselessly moving within it signifies the other six layers in constant motion as long as spacetime is visible. That space \(*akasha*\), then, dwells within the invisible matrix of pure waters inside the Goddess, whose is the womb belonging to Vasudeva.

As Brahma lives his days and nights inside the unmanifest Mother, he produces all beings from his body, a process that ultimately derives from the unmanifest Father: “All beings, O son of Kunti, pour into the \[feminine\] matter \(*prakriti*\) that belongs to me at the end of a cycle \(*kalpa*\), and again I emit them at the beginning of a cycle \(*kalpa*\). Grasping my own \[feminine\] matter, I emit again and again this whole unsubmissive collection of beings through the will of \[feminine\] matter” \(*BG* 9.7–8\). As we shall later see, that pattern suggests a scene of royal domestic pleasure: Vasudeva eats a meal, falls asleep, and digests the food into an embryo. During the night he impregnates Sri Lakshmi with the embryo by “grasping matter.” The Goddess transforms the embryo into Brahma the prince, who awakens for another day.



### ***The Radiant Womb and Its “Owner”***

Lokaloka, the all-enclosing placenta, is itself bounded by an undefined realm of radiant being, which is the uterus or womb. Anything put there, it is said, disappears altogether \(*BP* 5.20.35\). It is “great *brahman*” \(*mahad brahma*\), the unmanifest material womb \(*yoni*\) belonging to the “supreme *brahman*” \(*param brahma*\) as a wife belongs to the husband. As Krishna told Arjuna, Vasdudeva plants the embryo \(*garbha*\) from which all material forms emerge in that unmanifest womb, like a farmer who plants a seed in his field, from which an enormous *asvattha* tree filled with restless birds will grow: “My womb is great *brahman*, I place the embryo in it, and the coming into being of all living beings \(*bhutani*\) derives from that, O son of Bharata. In all wombs, O son of Kunti, whatever material form \(*murti*\) coalesces, great *brahman* is the womb, and I am the father that plants the seed \(*bija*\)” \(*BG* 14.3–4\). Once Vasudeva has planted the embryo in great *brahman*, his queen, she gestates it into their son, the prince. Yet the prince is named with the matronymic, Brahma; the patronymic Vasudeva is reserved for Krishna, for he is the father himself \(*BG* 7.19\).

But there is still more. Beyond Brahma’s body, beyond the pure waters that envelop it, and beyond the unmanifest golden womb there is Vasudeva’s Self embodied by “pure sattva.” It is nondual and can only be perceived and discussed in the ignorant terms of duality. It is the highest unmanifest realm that Krishna told Arjuna was his supreme home \(*dhama parama*\) \(*BG* 15.6\). It is the kingdom of God called Vaikuntha, “the penetrating or irresistable realm.” Vasudeva dwells there with his beloved Lakshmi and all beings there look like him \(*BP* 3.15.14\).

Vaikuntha, however, was not always impermeable to the power of unified consciousness. In the first manvantara of this kalpa, for example, Brahma’s four Kumara sons went there by means of their yogic powers. When the gatekeepers Jaya and Vijaya insulted them, the Bhagavan sent the two brothers into spacetime to be purified. They became Diti’s two asura sons, Hiranyaksha \(Golden Eyes\) and Hiranyakashipu \(Golden Clothes\). Hiranyaksha seized Goddess Earth and pulled her down into the underworld waters, which caused the Bhagavan to appear as the Boar; that Boar embodied the sacrifice through which life on earth is generated. Boar slew Hiranyaksha, established a place for Goddess Earth above the waters, and infused her with the fire of his tejas to enable her to procreate \(*BP* 3.13–19\). Vedic sacrifice \(*yajna*\), as embodied by Boar, is the means to protect Earth and propagate life through her.

As time caused Brahma to age, however, such commerce between earth and Vaikuntha became exceptional. Therefore, in response to Lakshmi’s request, the Lord of Vaikuntha \(Vaikunthanatha\) graciously made his realm accessible by establishing it on earth. That was during the fifth manvantara \(*BP* 8.5.4–6\). He placed it on the island called Three Peaks \(Trikuta\) in the Milk Ocean, northwest of Meru. Thereafter it was known as White Island \(Shveta Dvipa\). As Brahma’s day grows later, Vaikunthanatha residing on that island involves himself directly in the affairs of devas, asuras, and humans. Like the Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, whose Pure Land is also in the west, Vaikunthanatha on White Island listens attentively for cries of help emanating from Bharata.



## **Brahma’s Body**

### ***Realms above and below Dhruva the Pole Star***

Let us return to our universe of Brahma’s body. Once we move from the cosmos as a whole to more immediate realms, the governing metaphor shifts to the opened lotus rising above the waters of a pond. The open blossom represents Goddess Earth spread out horizontally at the cosmic center, with visible portions rising upward and hidden portions descending down into the water. Its layered rows of petals represent her seven continents and oceans, and its central seed cup the great mountain Meru. Like a lotus seed cup, mount Meru is larger at the top than at the bottom.

Directly above Meru is the realm of atmosphere \(*antariksha*\), and above that is heaven \(*dyaus*\), which canopies Earth. Above heaven is Dhruva. Dhruva is the apex of the universe that we perceive with our eyes as the north star, or pole star, around which every other star and planet rotates.2 When the constellations are visualized for meditation as a crocodile \(*shishumara*\), Dhruva is seen as the tip of its tail \(*BP* 5.23.4–5\).

Above Dhruva are worlds that do not burn up when Brahma’s waking ego consciousness goes to sleep, but survive until he dies. They are called Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka \(*BP* 2.7\).3 Satyaloka, “Realm of True Being,” is the material element space \(*akasha*\) into which Brahma’s ego ascends to sleep; it becomes the closed lotus blossom floating in the pure waters. On earth, the outermost continent called Pushkara \(Lotus\) signifies that outermost sheath of Brahma’s body, and its brilliantly shining lotus blossom denotes the boundary of Brahma’s body that folds into a closed lotus blossom to form a bedroom for his sleeping ego. From Dhruva upward, the four worlds are collectively known as “The Foot \(or Step or Place\) of Vishnu” \(Vishnupada\). They are beyond the reach of Yama, god of death. Souls who attain one of those Vishnupada worlds never again fall into rebirth, and they live as long as Brahma does \(*BP* 4.12.24–40\).

Below Dhruva are the worlds that burn up and flood during the periodical dissolution when Brahma’s ego sleeps. Earth \(*bhuloka*\), atmosphere \(*bhuvarloka*\), and heaven \(*svarloka*\), with Atala below Earth, constitute the darkest, innermost, and densest portion of Brahma’s body, the portion analogous to human flesh and blood consumed on the cremation pyre.



### ***Sun and His Movements***

Sun \(Surya\) is the Bhagavan in a form to measure the time of Brahma’s body. He drives his chariot around the middle of the atmosphere, its single wheel running along the mountain range of Pushkara, the seventh and outermost continent that is Brahma’s boundary. An axle stretches from that single wheel to Mount Meru at Earth’s center; a rod connects the axle to the region of Dhruva above. Except for the underworlds, all inhabited realms of space—from the earth to the pole star—receive Sun’s light in the sequence of dawn, midday, evening, and midnight. On Meru at the center, however, it is perpetually midday \(*BP* 5.21.7–8\).4 Beneath earth, the worlds are “fallen,” but are nevertheless gloriously filled with the pleasures of deluded senses. Yet Sun does not illuminate them; their light comes instead from shining gems on the hoods of huge resident snakes \(*naga*\) \(*BP* 5.24.22\).



### ***Jambu, Bharata, and Purgatory***

The central continent of Jambu is divided into nine regions \(*varsha*\). The central region, Ilavrita, surrounds great Meru on top of which Brahma’s wakeful ego dwells in a square golden city \(*BP* 5.17.28\). The remaining eight regions distribute themselves in the cardinal directions like a row of lotus petals emanating from the seed cup \(*BP* 5.16.7\).5 Three regions lie to the north, three to the south, and one each to the east and the west. Mountain ranges separate each region from one another, and each region borders the salt ocean that surrounds the continent \(*BP* 5.16–19\). Surrounded by eight mountain ranges, golden Mount Meru shines in the center like a blazing sacred fire.

The Ganga River, as it falls from the hole Dwarf’s left toe made in the cosmic sphere, flows down through Dhruva’s realm, through the heaven of devas and asuras, and onto the top of Mount Meru. There in Brahma’s city she divides into four branches to flow in the four directions until she reaches the salt ocean surrounding Jambu. The branch named Alakananda flows south-ward across the Himalayas and down through Bharata as the Ganga River we know \(*BP* 5.17.1 and 9; 9.9.1–15\). Her other branches are beyond human reach.

Only one of those nine regions is the realm of intentional action \(*karma*\); only on Bharata, south of Meru, may individual souls act for merit or sin. Unlike any other place in the universe, chronology on Bharata operates in sets of four ages \(*yuga*\), a thousand of which constitute a cycle \(*kalpa*\) of Brahma’s day-time. In all other regions on Earth, time is like the Treta Yuga on Bharata and, not unlike the “pure lands” of the Mahayana Buddhists and Jainas, those regions are perpetually pleasant for the deserving souls who have been reborn there.

On Bharata, when a person’s garment-like gross body of flesh and blood wears out and dies, Yama’s deputies usually take the disembodied soul \(*preta*\) that had worn it southward to the purgatorial realm called Naraka. According to the image of Earth as an opened lotus blossom rising on its stalk above the water of a pond, the southern purgatory ruled by Yama \(known also as Kala\) is located between the lotus petals and the water. Yama’s own capital lies on the southern side of the outermost mountain range “Beyond the Mind” \(Manasottara\), and Naraka lies somewhere nearby. As petitioners in a royal court do, ancestors \(*pitri*\) of various family lineages \(*gotra*\) reside at Naraka, meditating intensely on the Bhagavan in order to bring mercy to their descendents being purged. Nevertheless, Yama administers punishments to the souls strictly according to justice, for as a deva, Yama embodies Dharma.

Twenty-one divisions within Naraka specialize in specific types of punishment. Once punished, souls move into other realms of the worlds of rebirth according to their remaining karmic fruits, returning eventually to Bharata \(*BP* 5.26\). All beings below Dhruva envy humans on Bharata, because only there can a soul do what is necessary to escape from Brahma’s body of space-time altogether.



### ***The Nine Regions of Bharata***

According to Shuka, “the Bhagavan Narayana, who is the great Person,” for the sake of grace toward persons \(*purusha*\), makes a “formation of his own reality” available in each region of the Jambu continent. The inhabitants of each region offer specific mantras and prayers to the formation present there. At the center in Ilavrita, for example, Rudra Shiva, who is the only male allowed to dwell in the Ilavrita region, dwells on Kailasa, one of the eight mountains that surround Meru; he is Ishana, the Lokapala of the northeast. There he worships the Plower formation as he appears directly below in the lowest realm, Patala \(*BP* 5.17.14–24; 9.1.23–33; 9.16.27\).

Crucial to my identification of the panels on the porch and vimana that represent the nine regions of Jambu are the description of the Bhagavan’s form in each region, of the worshipers of each region, and of the content of the mantras and prayers they each offer. In turn, those identifications provided me a key for opening up the remainder of the cosmic mapping. Text illuminated image, and image illuminated text in a remarkable way. Briefly summarized, in the clockwise direction of circumambulation, the nine regions of the Jambu continent appear in the manner and sequence illustrated in Figure PIII.1. This figure also shows the placement of representations of other cosmographic features.




FIGURE PIII.1. Cosmography identified by sculpted panels on bottom-floor sanctum and porch. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.




### ***The Rhythm of Brahma’s Life***

The entire realm of spacetime, we recall, results from Vasudeva planting embryonic consciousness in Shakti, the Goddess Sri Lakshmi, and letting her develop it. The resulting Brahma is a paradigmatic patriarch, perhaps modeled after the fourth, or *brahman*, priest in the shrauta sacrifices: he was to know all the Veda and sat south of the square eastern altar to supervise and correct the rites.

Let us review Brahma’s career. Once Vasudeva has planted Brahma’s embryonic form in the womb of the Goddess, she creates for him a subtle body; within that subtle body she develops a gross body. When the fetus is ready, Vasudeva creates a sense of “I” or “name” \(*nama*\) in it by bringing Brahma’s time, karma, and essential nature \(*svabhava*\) into contact with the consciousness of the Self. Those three individuating variables were the material remainders of a previous “Brahma” who had died and was now being reborn \(my interpretation of *BP* 2.5.32–35\).

By following the patterns time and karma provided, and by developing in accord with his essential nature, Brahma transforms both the lotus-womb in which he gestates and his own body into the form of the fourteen worlds. When he completes that development, his waking sense of “I” takes up residence in the densely material dimension at his bodily center to dwell on golden mount Meru.

As noted, once born, Brahma lives a one hundred years measured by days and nights. When night comes, his waking consciousness moves to the unmanifest state of sleep, a movement experienced by his gross body as a periodical dissolution of its layered form. Through fire and water, its dense and darkened layers dissolve into one another until only the most refined sheath of space \(*akasha*\) remains. That invisible material sheath, called Satyaloka or Bramaloka, which lasts the length of Brahma’s life, takes the form of a lotus for his ego’s sleep. But he does not sleep alone. Whatever souls may have escaped death during that dissolution dwell inside the closed *akasha* lotus, experiencing only sorrow for those whose ignorance keeps them in endless pain \(*BP* 2.2.22–28\). The lotus is at the “center” of the Unobstructed, now reclining in the “sleep of unified consciousness” \(*yoganidra*\).

In other words, Brahma is the Bhagavan’s impassioned consciousness centered on a sense of “I am” and “This is mine.” But of course the Bhagavan is more than ego-centeredness. While the Unobstructed sleeps, awakes, and sleeps again, Vasudeva watches. And the Unobstructed himself watches Brahma after his day has begun, wide awake, with a consciousness that has no ego. As Krishna told Arjuna: “And these acts of mine do not bind me, O Prize Winner, as one indifferent I sit unentangled among these acts. While I watch and preside, matter gives birth to the moveable and immoveable; by this means, O son of Kunti, the moving universe revolves” \(*BG* 9.9–10\).

When Brahma goes to sleep, it is as if the Unobstructed, who has been sitting on a throne made of the Plower snake to watch his son, now eats a meal. As the fiery mouth of Time, Vishnu consumes Brahma’s gross body, just as the cremation fire consumes the corpse \(*BG* 11\). Having eaten, the Unobstructed lies down to sleep, and now the Plower snake is his bed. As he sleeps he digests the meal, transforming it into the embryo of the next day’s ego-centered consciousness. Moreover, Pre-eminently Mighty passion produces dreams of what had happened in previous waking days, and what will happen when his ego awakes for the new day.

The Unobstructed begins to awaken with a sexual act. Lying on his snake bed, he ejaculates the embryo of Brahma into the lotus womb located at his navel. In narratives and sculptures, that ejaculation is portrayed as the akasha lotus rising upward from the navel of the reclining Unobstructed. The embryonic Brahma ascends the stalk to enter its lotus bud. The bud then opens, and Brahma—the Unobstructed’s ego—is awake. Brahma’s body and the lotus now unfold into the multilayered cosmos of spacetime, and the Unobstructed sits up on the Plower as his throne. Again he watches his own waking ego play the patriarch of a very large and very complex family in his residence on Mount Meru.



## ******Representations of Earth on the Vimana and Porch**

Let us now examine the way the temple’s designers depicted the horizontal structure of Brahma’s body. They selected four of spacetime’s major divisions and used the Bhagavan’s form as it appears in each division to represent them. Those four sculpted panels are at the corners of the walls facing west and east. They designate 1\) Lokaloka, the encompassing edge of directional space; 2\) Surya, chronological time operating within directional space: 3\) Pushkara, Earth’s outermost continent; and 4\) Jambu, Earth’s innermost continent. We shall consider each of those panels as viewers encounter them walking clockwise, beginning at the porch’s southwest corner.



### ***Lokaloka Enclosing Pure Water***

The boundary of directional space at the level of the earth is the huge mountain range Lokaloka, the meeting place of directional space \(*loka*\) and nondirectional space \(*aloka*\). Beyond Lokaloka there is neither sunlight nor directions, but there is Time: great Time \(*mahakala*\), not measured by the sun, moon, and stars. It exists in Narayana’s own being. All around the Lokaloka mountain range Vasudeva appears as the Supreme Great Person composed of pure sattva \(*BP* 5.20.40\). He infuses power into the elephants that define the quarters and into the Protectors of the World residing on at the edge of Brahma’s body “Beyond the Mind” \(Manasottara\).

In Panel W2, Vasudeva on Lokaloka is sculpted sitting in royal ease with four faces turned to the four cardinal directions, for he is “God composed of all wonders, the Endless, with a face in every direction” \(*BG* 11.11\). People on Bharata granted the vision of him, like Arjuna on the Kuru battlefield, see him as Vishnu pervading the universe, facing them inward from each direction. Containing spacetime, he nurtures and protects it. And eventually, as Arjuna saw to his horror, he eats it \(*BP* 5.20.40–42; *BG* 11.19–31\). God eats his own gross body to allow his ego to sleep. As the manifestation of Time \(Kala\) \(*BG* 11.32\), Vishnu is the master of disorder \(*nirriti*\) who controls from within, which is why he is depicted at this southwest corner of the porch, where night’s disorder \(*nirriti*\) begins.



### ***The Continent of Plaksha and the Worship of Sun***

To represent chronological time as built into directional space, the designers depicted Vasudeva’s appearance as the deva Sun \(Surya\). He is the impermanent mode of Time \(Kala\), which propels Brahma’s gross body by measuring out the year \(*BP* 5.21–22; 3.11\). Known as “Ruler of All” \(Vishveshvara\), Sun is the master of order who controls from the outside and protects at dawn \(*BP* 6.8.22\). In the panel he is portrayed with four arms, flying above the continent called Plaksha. As he flies in the sky, the king of Plaksha and his seven sons look up to worship him. Their realm is beyond human reach, for Plaksha is the first continent beyond earth’s Jambu center, enclosing it and the saltwater ocean surrounding it.

Placed at the north end of the porch, Panel W5 represents the period of night of about 2–4 a.m., just before “Brahma’s hour” \(*brahmamuhurta*\). The viewer faces east toward the moving sun, but conceptually the sun is moving over Plaksha rather than over Bharata. As we recall, Surya’s single-wheeled chariot drives around the middle of the atmosphere above the earth; his chariot axle links the outer and the inner continents into the single inhabited realm of Earth. When Sun appears over Plaksha in the east, we on Jambu cannot see him, because he is too far away. This panel signifies late-night darkness, and as viewers walk clockwise, they move toward Surya as he comes from the east. “Brahma’s hour” of about 4–6 a.m. is represented by the next panel that comes into view: On the north end of the vimana’s west-facing side, Boar, the embodiment of sacrifice, teaches Brahma during his hour ending night, the brahmamuhurta \(Panel W6\).



### ***The Continent of Pushkara***

The outermost continent is named Pushkara for the lotus \(*pushkara*\) that shines on it. It marks the outer limit of inhabited Earth. The nonhuman inhabitants of Pushkara worship Vasudeva reborn as his son, Brahma, whose lotus has thousands and millions of petals shining like flames. Panel E1, which depicts Brahma and the lotus facing east, stands on the north corner of the east-facing wall. Brahma is portrayed worshiping Surya at sunrise. In cosmography, the panel denotes the all-encompassing sheath of space \(*akasha*\) that is the outer edge of Brahma’s body. Pushkara is the domain of Brahma’s “enlightened” consciousness in contrast to his “darkened” ego awake on Mount Meru.



### ***The Center of Space and Brahma’s Ego Awake***

The center of directional space is the Ilavrita region where Mount Meru stands. At the south end of the vimana’s east-facing wall \(Panel E6\), that region is represented by two standing males, each with four arms. One is a form of the Bhagavan and the other is a form of Rudra Shiva. Shiva dwells in Ilavrita on the mountain Kailasa, and because Vasudeva is the source of his own ability to destroy all embodied beings, including Brahma himself, Shiva worships Vasudeva’s formations \(*BP* 5.17.11–24\).

Through delusion \(*tamas*\), the Plower formation creates the sense of “I” \(*ahamkara*\) in Brahma and in all his descendents, including humans. In both Brahma and in humans, it is the deluded ego that sustains the gross body, that accounts for its aging and dying, and that brings about rebirth. The “I” is propelled by the passionate desire to create a world for itself with itself as the center; Brahma’s emanation of the cosmos out of his own body is the paradigm for that fact. The ego’s propelling desire, of course, derives from the Pre-eminently Mighty, the formation that emerges from the Plower as the Goddess unfolds the universe.

The panel itself suggests that the Plower has already reformed himself into the Pre-eminently Mighty. It depicts Shiva with four arms and matted hair standing on Mount Kailasa in the central region of Ilavrita; he turns toward the crowned Bhagavan with four arms, who is slightly longer and taller. Apparently, Shiva, who worships the Plower as he appears in Patala, is doing so here by means of the Pre-eminently Mighty, for in the manner of all formations, the Plower remains present in a hidden manner.

That “visual text” provides four sophisticated ideas with playful irony. First, we know that the Pre-eminently Mighty formation produces the deva Kama, and that Shiva produces the deva Skanda. We may therefore read the panel as Skanda worshiping Kama. Second, since Skanda was born to Krishna by Jambavati as his son Samba, and Kama was born to Krishna by Rukmini as his son Pradyumna, we may also read it as Samba venerating his older half-brother Pradyumna \(*BP* 3.1.28–30; 10.61.8–12\). Third, since Samba embodies anger \(*krodha*\) and Pradyumna embodies desire \(*kama*\), and since anger derives from frustrated desire, the panel may be read as anger venerating its own source. That relates to the fourth reading: Shiva worships Kama, the deva he had turned to ashes with the blazing fire of his third eye.

As the Tamil poet Goda \(Antal\) reveals, Bhagavatas used the half-brothers Pradyumna and Samba together to represent the fullness of the Pre-eminently Mighty formation. In the first stanza of her *Nacchiyar Tirumoli*, dated to the early ninth century, she enlisted Krishna’s sons Pradyumna and Samba for a prolonged ceremony. Its goal was to bring her to Krishna in the Vrindavana forest, which was the way she envisioned the standing icon on distant Mount Venkatam over three hundred miles north of her town. In her vision, Pradyumna appears as the invisible Kama, whose body Shiva had already turned to ash. The poem is discussed below in chapter 14. Around the same period, the Tamil poet Poykai composed a stanza that correlates remarkably with this panel, *Tiruvantati* 74. As we shall see in chapter 14, Poykai expressed puzzlement at how to distinguish two males who, like brothers standing side by side, closely resemble each other.

Finally, the allusion to Samba in this panel foreshadows destructive events represented around the corner by the Krishna panel on the vimana’s south-facing side. By dressing as a pregnant woman, Prabhasha, Samba was the occasion for the destruction of Krishna’s Vrishni clan, for the “death” of Krishna himself, and for the onset of the Kali Yuga. During the Vrishnis’ drunken slaughter, Krishna’s two sons disrupted the balanced scene of this panel and fought each other to their deaths \(*BP* 11.1 and 30\).



### ***The Sequence of the Four Panels***

Another Tamil stanza suggests that the sequence of these four panels—Vasudeva as encompassing container, Vasudeva as Sun, Brahma and the shining lotus, and Shiva venerating the Bhagavan—was customary by the time the temple was built. The poet called Bhutam, from the Kanchipuram region, noted the same sequence in *Irantan-tiruvantati* 12, with this difference: After stating that all people should worship the Unobstructed as reclining on the Plower snake, he described the sequence of worship leading to him:


Neither he there nor he here,

no one at all,

Should avoid worshiping and praising

The foot of him whose couch is the Snake,

For even \[Surya\] with abundant light

shining everywhere,

And \[Brahma\] in the radiant flower,

And \[Shiva\] with the eye in his forehead,

By nature seek him out every day to worship,

Do they not?


If Bhutam predated this Vishnu-house, he either reported his own circumambulation of another temple similarly organized, or he visualized a circumambulation in his mind.6 If he was contemporary with Nandivarman, he may in fact have visited this Vishnu-house. In that case, we may imagine that after he worshiped the formations of the bottom sanctum, Bhutam exited the bottom sanctum and crossed the bridge to the prakara walkway and walked northward to venerate Sun at the porch’s northwest corner. He then walked eastward to venerate Brahma and the shining lotus at the northeast corner. Then he walked southward to venerate Shiva with the Bhagavan at the southeast corner. Perhaps he then backtracked to the small eastern bridge to cross the “moat” into the vimana and walked up the south stairway to the middle-floor sanctum. There he worshiped “the foot of him whose couch is the Snake.”



## **Representations of Day-and-night, Month, and Age**

If we keep in mind that the porch on the middle floor and the porch on the bottom floor extend the temple’s west-facing side and develop its meanings, we can correlate their respective panels with the divisions of chronological time. That allows us to discern representations of the day-and-night \(*ahoratra*\), the months \(*masa*\) that divide the solar year \(*samvatsara*\), and the four ages \(*yuga*\) found only on Bharata.

The four ages \(*chaturyuga*\) are represented in a subtle numerical manner. Each age is represented by a number: The years of the perfect Krita Yuga consist of a set of four, those of the Treta Yuga a set of three, those of the Dvapara Yuga a set of two, and those of the Kali Yuga a set of one. That totals ten, but the junctures \(*samdhya*\) between the ages brings the total of the whole Chatur Yuga set to twelve.

Twelve, of course, corresponds to the number of months in a year \(*samvatsara*\), and year itself signifies a day-and-night \(*ahoratra*\). Accordingly, the most perfect Krita \(or Satya\) Yuga, represented by the number four, corresponds to “Brahma’s hour” that ends night. The Treta Yuga of the number three corresponds to sunrise and morning. The Dvapara Yuga of the number two corresponds to midday, afternoon, sunset. And the Kali Yuga of the number one corresponds to night.

If we assign the junctures \(*samdhya*\) of the ages to the corners of the vimana, and move in the clockwise direction, we may recognize those four ages in the panels between the corners. On the north-facing side, the fourfold Krita Yuga appears as all four panels. On the east-facing side, the threefold Treta Yuga appears as its first three panels. On the south-facing side, the twofold Dvapara Yuga appears as its first two panels. And on the west-facing side, the singular Kali Yuga appears as a single panel duplicated on either side of the porch entrance. Other meanings encoded in this highly sophisticated “literary” monument will be discussed in the concluding chapters.

To document this analylsis of the vimana’s bottom floor, we shall now turn to the details of its sculpted panels. They follow the mandala we discussed in chapter 5, which governs the middle sanctum’s depiction of God’s subtle body. Here on the bottom floor of the vimana and its porch, however, that mandala governs God’s gross body.




