+++
title = "003"
+++
Sammukhyatā Entails Direct Bhakti 
3.1 
All Forms of Sammukhyata Culminate in Bhakti 
३ । तत्र यद्यपि श्रवणमननादिकं ज्ञानसाधनमपि तत्साम्मुख्यमेव – ब्रह्माकारस्य तस्या- नुभवहेतुत्वात् । अत एव तत्परम्परोपयोगित्वात् साङ्ख्याष्टाङ्गयोगकर्माण्यपि तत्सा- म्मुख्यान्येव तथा तेषां कथञ्चिद् भक्तित्वमपि जायते - कर्मणस्तदाज्ञापालनरूपत्वेन तदर्पितत्वादिना च करणात् ज्ञानादीनां चान्यत्रानासक्तिहेतुत्वादिद्वारा भक्तिसचिवतया विधानात् तथापि पूर्वम् “भक्त्याभजेत्” (भा०११ २ ३७) इत्यनेन कर्मज्ञानादिकं नादृतं किन्तु साक्षाद्भक्त्या श्रवणकीर्तनादिलक्षणयैव भजेतेत्युक्तम् । 
| 
PRACTICES such as hearing and deliberating on scripture, which are also part of the sadhana that pertains to the path of jñāna, or “self-inquiry,” certainly involve the redirecting of one's intent- ful regard toward the Absolute Reality (tat-sammukhyam), because they are instrumental in the immediate realization of that Reality as the unqualified Absolute (Brahman). Conse- quently, the disciplines of sānkhya, astánga-yoga, and karma- yoga are also methods of directing one's regard toward the Abso- lute (tat-sammukhyam), because they indirectly lead to the same realization. Sometimes these paths may also lead to bhakti. 
For example, karma-yoga is instrumental in attaining bhakti, because it consists of following the orders of Bhagavan, as enjoined in scripture, and because the results of such action are offered to Him. Jnāna, sānkhya, and astāriga-yoga are recom- mended as supports to bhakti inasmuch as they awaken detach- ment from all that is nonessential. In spite of acknowledging that these other paths do involve the directing of one's regard 
3 Sammukhyata Entails Direct Bhakti 
toward the Absolute, it is clear from the earlier injunction to worship with devotion (bhaktyā ābhajet, SB 11.2.37, Anuccheda 1) that karma, jñāna, and so on, are not held in very high regard. Rather, it was stated that one should worship with direct devo- tion (säkṣat-bhakti), which involves practices such as hearing and giving verbal expression to the glories of Bhagavan. 
1 
Commentary 
IN HIS TEACHINGS to Uddhava, Śrī Kṛṣṇa declares that for the well-being of humanity, He has propounded three types of yoga, namely, karma, jñāna, and bhakti. He also adds that apart from these three, there are no other means of attaining freedom from material bondage (SB 11.20.6). Among them, karma-yoga is benefi- cial for those whose minds are still attached to material enjoyment, as it gradually leads to the slackening of desire. Jñana-yoga is suit- able for those in whom detachment has been awakened and who have no inclination to strive for material pleasure. Bhakti-yoga is meant for those in whom faith has been born in the śästrika revela- tion of Bhagavan, and who are neither completely repelled by nor excessively attached to worldly life (SB 11.20.7-8). 
Sankhya and aṣṭānga-yoga are not mentioned by Krsna in the list of yogas. They are understood to be subsumed under the category of jñāna, because the basic qualification for all three, i.e., jñāna, sānkhya, and aṣṭānga-yoga, is nonattachment to conditional action. The word yoga here means "a path, process, or means." From this description, it is understood that all three paths involve the turning of one's intentful regard toward the Absolute Reality (tat- sammukhyam), and thus all of them constitute specific forms of abhidheya, or the prescribed means for attaining freedom from suf- fering. There is, however, a difference in the goal attained by these three yogas. Karma-yoga leads to heaven, jñāna-yoga to realization 
nirvinṇānām jñāna-yogo nyasinam iha karmasu 
teşv anirvinna-cittānām karma-yogas tu kāminām 
yadṛcchaya mat-kathadau jäta-śraddhas tu yah puman na nirvinno nätisakto bhakti-yogo'sya siddhi-daḥ 
37 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
of Brahman, and bhakti to the immediate perception of and love for Bhagavan. 
Karma-yoga promotes awareness of Bhagavan through the pre- scription to offer one's actions to Him and by orienting the per- former to fulfill his worldly duties as the sacred order of Bhagavan propounded in scripture. An example of this type of instruction is as follows: 
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in sacri- fice, whatever you donate in charity, and whatever austerity you perform, O son of Kunti, do all of that as an offering unto Me. (GĪTĀ 9.27)2 
Since, however, the performer of karma-yoga maintains a sense of independent doership and is predominantly oriented toward his or her own enjoyment, Jīva Gosvāmī makes the point that even offering the results of one's actions is essentially indistinguishable from the state of disaffected regard (vaimukhya). Hence, karma- yoga is only secondarily a form of sammukhya inasmuch as it leads either to jñāna or bhakti. 
Jñana, on the other hand, is a direct form of sammukhya, because it focuses attention on the Absolute Reality (para-tattva) in Its unqualified feature as Brahman. Moreover, because Brahman is but an aspect of Bhagavan, the means to Brahman realization (i.e., jñāna) is also indirectly sammukhya of Bhagavan. Here, how- ever, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī begins a lengthy discussion to show that of the three yogas prescribed by Kṛṣṇa, only bhakti-yoga entails the complete form of sammukhya, and hence it alone is the true abhidheya. 
2 
In this regard, we may note that in Anuccheda 1, Śrī Jiva had analyzed the root cause of the jiva's conditioned state in univer- sal terms as para-tattva-vaimukhya, without specifying the para- tattva as Brahman or Bhagavan. Correspondingly, the abhidheya, 
yat karoşi yad aśnasi yaj juhoși dadasi yat 
yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kuruşva mad-arpanam 
38 
3 Sammukhyata Entails Direct Bhakti 
which is the means to reverse this condition, was identified as para- tattva-sammukhya. In the same anuccheda, he then defined sammu- khya as upāsanā, without further specifying upāsanā. It must be born in mind here that upasana (commonly translated either as "meditation" or "worship") is a term that is relevant both to the jñāna-mārga and the bhakti-marga. Used in regard to the para- tattva, its root meaning is "to sit (asana) in the presence (upa) of the Absolute Reality (para-tattva)." Up to this point in the discussion, Śrī Jiva's language is relevant to all spiritual practitioners regard- less of their path, because it refers to the Absolute only in generic terms as para-tattva and identifies the means in corresponding terms as the directing of one's intentful regard toward that Reality (sammukhya). 
Now in Anuccheda 3, Śrī Jiva begins to specify that the most com- plete manifestation of the para-tattva is Bhagavan. Correspond- ingly, the most complete form of sammukhya is that which dis- closes the Absolute as Bhagavan, and this indeed is nothing other than bhakti. In this regard, karma and jñāna are to be considered as subsidiary aspects of the means (abhidheya) only if they assist one's bhakti in some capacity. In other words, they are useful only when they are mixed with or facilitate bhakti and thus support the turning of one's intentful regard toward Bhagavan. 
It was with this intention that the sage Kavi prescribed exclu- sive devotion to Bhagavan as the solution to the conditioned state of disaffected regard - bhaktyā ekaya isam budha abhajet tam (SB 11.2.37, cited in Anuccheda 1). The adjective ekaya, "one-pointed," signifies exclusive devotion, unmixed with any other yoga. The rea- son why emphasis is given to bhakti alone as the means to overcome illusion is that māyā belongs to Bhagavan and not to Brahman or anyone else. Only by taking shelter of the master of the deluding energy can one gain freedom from it. 
By way of analogy, this is comparable to the predicament of visiting a friend who has a Rottweiler standing guard just inside the gate to the yard. As soon as you enter the main gate, the dog jumps on you, placing its front paw threateningly on your belly. In that moment, even if you call the neighbors or passers-by for 
39 
410 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
help, it would be of no avail. If, however, you holler for your friend, then as soon as he comes out and orders the dog to stand down, it will do so immediately, all the while wagging its tail in front of its master. Māyā is similarly under the control of its sup- reme master. Accordingly, in the verse quoted in the previous anuccheda (samsara-hetuparamaḥ, SB 2.2.6), Sukadeva also recom- mended worship (bhajana) of Bhagavan as the means of uprooting the cause of material existence. 
Bhakti Established by All Teachers in Śrīmad Bhāgavata 
Anucchedas 3.2-941 Sūta Gosvāmī Instructs Saunaka and the Sages 
Anucchedas 3.2-22 
3.2 
Bhakti to Bhagavan Is Para-dharma 
तथैव सहेतुकं श्रीसूतोपदेशोपक्रमत एव दृश्यते । यथाह " स वै" (भा० १।२।६) इत्यादिना " अतो वै कवयः" (भा० १ । २ । २२ ) इत्यन्तेन ग्रन्थेन । 
The same point is made with valid reasoning in the very begin- ning of Śri Sūta's teachings. This section begins with his state- ment that humanity's supreme essential duty (para-dharma) is that which leads to bhakti to Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa (SB 1.2.6), and con- cludes with the verse: "For this reason indeed, the enlightened sages, out of supreme delight, continuously engage in bhakti to Bhagavan Vasudeva [Kṛṣṇa], which is utterly fulfilling to the self" (SB 1.2.22). 
तत्र ( भा० १२६) - 
The opening verse of this section is as follows: 
स वै पुंसां परो धर्मो यतो भक्तिरधोक्षजे । अहैतुक्यप्रतिहता ययात्मा सुप्रसीदति ॥ १० ॥ 
That alone is humanity's supreme essential duty by which cause- less, unobstructed bhakti to Adhokṣaja [Kṛṣṇa] can come into being, as a consequence of which the self is completely fulfilled. (SB 1.2.6)* 
यत् खलु महापुराणारम्भे पृष्टं सर्वशास्त्रसारमैकान्तिकं श्रेयो ब्रूहीति तत्रोत्तरम् “स वै” इत्यादि । 
In the beginning of the Mahapuraṇa, Śrimad Bhagavata, the sages inquired, "Please tell us, what is the singular ultimate good, determined as the very essence of all scriptures?" [SB 1.1.9]. In response to this question, Sūta Gosvāmī spoke these verses. 
3 
4 
ato vai kavayo nityam bhaktim paramayā mudā 
vasudeve bhagavati kurvanty atma-prasādanim 
sa vai pumsām paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje ahaituky apratihata yayātmā suprasidati 
45 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
यतो धर्मादधोक्षजे भक्तिस्तत्कथाश्रवणादिषु रुचिर्भवति “धर्मः स्वनुष्ठितः” (भा० ११२२८) इत्यादौ व्यतिरेकेण दर्शयिष्यमाणत्वात् । 
The first verse in this series [SB 1.2.6] states that humanity's sup- reme essential duty (para-dharma) is that by which bhakti for Adhoksaja [Kṛṣṇa] can come into being, or in other words, that by which a taste is awakened for devotional acts, such as hear- ing the narrations of Bhagavan. This conclusion is validated two verses later (SB 1.2.8) through negative concomitance (vyati- reka): [In the latter verse, it is asserted that if one perfectly ful- fills all his prescribed socio-religious duties but does not awaken a taste for hearing the narrations of Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa, then his endeavors are fruitless.] 
सवै स एव " स्वनुष्ठितस्य धर्मस्य संसिद्धिर्हरितोषणम्" (भा० ११२ ११३) इति वक्ष्यमाणरी- त्या तत्सन्तोषणार्थमेव कृतो धर्मः परः सर्वतः श्रेष्ठः न निवृत्तिमात्रलक्षणोऽपि वैमुख्याविशे- षात् । तथा च श्रीनारदवाक्यम् “नैष्कर्म्यमप्यच्युतभाववर्जितम् ” (भा० १।५।१२ ) इत्यादौ "कुतः पुनः शश्वदभद्रमीश्वरे न चार्पितं कर्म यदप्यकारणम्” (भा० १।५।१२) इति । 
In SB 1.2.6, the words sa vai mean, "that alone" [is the supreme dharma]. This will be confirmed in SB 1.2.13 [Anuccheda 8], wherein it is said that the highest perfection of dharma metic- ulously executed according to the divisions of varṇāśrama cul- minates in the satisfaction of Bhagavan Hari. In other words, dharma performed exclusively for the satisfaction of Bhagavan is paramount (para), superseding all other forms of dharma. This indicates that merely renouncing the fruit of one's actions, or even action itself, is not the supreme dharma, since it is indistinguishable from the general state of disaffected regard (vaimukhya). On this account, Śri Narada says: 
46 
In Nyaya, or the School of logic, there are two connected propositions used to prove an assertion, known as anvaya and vyatireka. Anvaya means a positive affirmation, "by doing A, an auspicious result is attained." Vyatireka means a negative declaration that amounts to the same thing, "by not doing A, a detrimental result is attained." These terms are used throughout Bhakti Sandarbha and are referred to as positive and negative concomitance. 
3 Sammukhyata Entails Direct Bhakti 
Even naiskarmya-jñāna, or "the awareness that pertains to the very nature of Brahman," which frees one from all taints (nira- ñjanam), is inadequately illuminating if devoid of devotional affect (bhava) for Bhagavan Acyuta [Śrī Kṛṣṇa]. What then can be said of motivated action [kamya-karma], which is always inauspicious, or even of unmotivated action (akaraṇam), when not offered to Bhagavan? (SB 1.5.12)" 
अतो वक्ष्यते "अतः पुम्भिः” (भा० १ |२| १३) इत्यादि । ततः स एवैकान्तिकं श्रेय इत्यर्थः । अनेन भक्तेस्तादृशधर्मतोऽप्यतिरिक्तत्वमुक्तम् । 
Consequently, Sūta Gosvāmi will declare in SB 1.2.13 that the highest perfection of dharma meticulously executed according to the divisions of varṇāśrama is to satisfy Bhagavan Hari. This alone is thus determined as the ultimate good [in answer to the sages' inquiry in SB 1.1.9]. This conveys the superiority of bhakti even to the discharge of duties in varṇāśrama [i.e., even to those socio-religious duties that are offered for the satisfaction of Bhagavan]. 
तस्या भक्तेः स्वरूपगुणमाह-स्वत एव सुखरूपत्वात् "अहैतुकी” फलान्तरानुसन्धान- रहिता । अप्रतिहता तदुपरि सुखदुःखदपदार्थान्तराभावात् केनापि व्यवधातुमशक्या च । जातायां च तस्यां रुचिलक्षणायां भक्त्यां तयैव श्रवणादिलक्षणः साधनभक्तियोगः प्रवर्तितः स्यात् ॥ 
The qualities that are intrinsic to the essential nature of such bhakti are also pointed out in SB 1.2.6. Because it is pleasing by its very nature, it is causeless (ahaituki), meaning that it is utterly 
7 
The predicate "is inadequately illuminating," which is stated of naiskarmya-jñāna, is a translation of the words alam na sobhate, lit., "it does not illuminate or beautify adequately (alam)." Sridhara Svāmi glosses the phrase in question as alam aty artham na sobhate samyag aparokṣaya na kalpate, meaning that even naiskarmya-jñāna does not have the capacity to enable complete unmediated cognition of the Truth that lies beyond the purview of the senses (if devoid of bhakti). It is clear from this comment that the word sobha here refers to the presumed illuminating power of jñana and the fact that its power to disclose ultimate Truth is dependent entirely on bhakti. For further discussion of this verse, see Anuccheda 23. 
naiskarmyam apy acyuta-bhava-varjitam na sobhate jñānam alam niranjanam kutah punah sasvad abhadram isvare na carpitam karma yad apy akaraṇam 
47 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
devoid of the inclination to seek any other result. It is also unob- structed (apratihată), because there is nothing more pleasing that could divert one from bhakti, and nothing as dishearten- ing as the nonparticipation in bhakti. Additionally, it cannot be interrupted by any extraneous force. When bhakti charac- terized by relish arises, this itself propels one in the various practices of sadhana-bhakti-yoga, such as hearing the glories of Bhagavan, and so on. 
Commentary 
To establish the fact that bhakti is the most complete form of sammu- khya and that it is thus the abhidheya prescribed in scripture, Śrī Jiva takes recourse to Srimad Bhagavata, the highest pramāņa in the matter of the self-disclosure of the Absolute Reality. In the very first chapter of Srimad Bhāgavata, Śrī Saunaka posed six questions to his teacher, Śrī Sūta. Among them, the following is the most relevant for the present discussion of the abhidheya: 
There are innumerable prescribed practices and a profusion of scriptures to be studied, each with their various subdivisions and in systematic order. Therefore, O saintly teacher, having extracted the essence of all such means to the ultimate good through thought- ful reflection, please inform us, who are firmly established in faith, of that preeminent engagement by which the self can attain complete fulfillment. (SB 1.1.11)8 
Before raising this question, Śrī Saunaka stated that Sūta had studied various branches of scripture, such as the Purānas, the Iti- hāsas, and the dharma-sastras, and that he knew in truth whatever was known to other sages, including Vyasa, the greatest authority on the Vedas. Because Sūta was very dear to his guru, he was able 
⚫ bhūriņi bhūri-karmani śrotavyāni vibhāgaśaḥ 
ataḥ sadho'tra yat saram samuddhṛtya manīṣayā 
bruhi naḥ śraddadhānānāṁ yenātmā suprasīdati 
In Śrīdhara Svami's reading of this verse, the words bhadraya bhūtānām, "for the welfare of all beings," are found in place of nah śraddadhānānām, "to us, who are firmly established in faith." 
48 
3 Sammukhyata Entails Direct Bhakti 
to grasp the confidential meaning of the scriptures by his grace. With this introduction, Saunaka implied that Sūta was not just a teacher of one particular branch of knowledge but an authority on the entire gamut of Vedic scriptures. As a result, his response would not be biased or relevant only to one specific school of prac- titioners, such as the astanga-yogis, the jñānis, or the karma-kandis. 
As a lead-up to his question, Saunaka also said that in the present age of Kaliyuga, people have comparatively shorter lifes- pans, they are not inclined to undergo any sort of hardship in the pursuit of truth, they are easily disturbed in mind, and thus they are not particularly astute in understanding the intricacies of scripture. He thus requested Śrī Sūta to specify the essence of the śāstras as a whole for the benefit of all humanity. Saunaka's question, being universal in nature, was not tied to any specific process. On this account, Sūta was not bound to delineate a partic- ular point of view. Rather, he was at liberty to select the best and most efficacious process prescribed in the Vedic scriptures. 
Saunaka's question involves two concerns, namely: 
1. What is the essential duty (dharma) prescribed in the sastra for 
human beings in general? 
2. And, by what engagement is the self naturally and completely 
fulfilled? 
Śrī Sūta gives an elaborate reply to this question. First, he sup- plies the definitive answer in just one verse (SB 1.2.6) and then elab- orates its meaning up to SB 1.2.22. The gist of his answer is that it is pure bhakti alone that is the central message of all sastras and that pure bhakti alone is the essential means prescribed that is completely fulfilling to the self. 
In SB 1.2.6, the emphatic particle vai (lit., "indeed") means "only." This amounts to saying that the supreme duty (para- dharma) of humanity is that alone (sa vai) by which one can attain bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This para-dharma can be nothing other than bhakti, because only bhakti leads to bhakti (bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā, SB 11.3.31). Therefore, to distinguish bhakti from conven- tional dharmas, the adjective "supreme" (parah) has been added 
49 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
(SB 1.2.6). In other words, the real dharma for every human being is to engage in bhakti, the paro dharmah. In one of the introduc- tory verses of Srimad Bhagavata as well (SB 1.1.2), this bhakti was referred to by the words paramo dharmaḥ. This is again made explicit by Yamarāja in his instructions to his servants: 
In this world, this alone is asserted to be the supreme essential duty (para-dharma) of humanity, namely, to engage in bhakti-yoga to Bhagavan by uttering His names and other such direct acts of devotion. (SB 6.3.22)9 
The underlying message of the verse under discussion (SB 1.2.6) is that bhakti unfolds in two stages, designated as the stage of prac- tice, or sadhana-bhakti, and the stage of completion, or sadhya- bhakti, also known as divine love (prema or priti). In the beginning stage, one becomes involved in sadhana-bhakti in the form of hear- ing, chanting, and so on, and this participation eventually leads to the perfected state of bhakti, meaning prema. 
Although there appears to be a cause-effect relation between bhakti as sadhana and the sadhya of prema, this is not actually the case. Because prema is an eternally self-existent potency of Bhaga- vān, it cannot be brought about by any cause that is distinct from it. In truth, the one conscious potency of bhakti partially lends its nature to the practitioner in the stage of sadhana and then discloses itself fully as prema in the stage of completion. It is for this reason that the means and end are understood to be one and the same in bhakti. The cause-effect relation that is supposed to exist between these two stages of bhakti is posited only for our general under- standing. In reality, they are just two states of the same object. In commenting on this verse (SB 1.2.6), Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti compares sadhana-bhakti and sadhya-bhakti to the unripe and ripe conditions of one and the same mango. 
9 
In the verse under discussion, the two adjectives of bhakti ahaituki and apratihata - indicate that the bhakti being referred to is sadhya-bhakti, the perfected state of devotion. Ahaituki means 
etävän eva loke'smin pumsam dharmah parah smrtah bhakti-yogo bhagavati tan-nama-grahaṇādibhiḥ 
50 
3 Sammukhyata Entails Direct Bhakti 
"without any motive." Because bhakti is itself of the nature of bliss, it is completely fulfilling to the self. As a consequence, engagement in bhakti is not impelled by any ulterior motive. The purpose of all actions is to be happy, which is the very nature of bhakti. Alterna- tively, the word ahaituki can be taken to mean "that which is with- out cause." Bhakti is understood as causeless since the only source of bhakti is bhakti itself. There is nothing external to bhakti that can give rise to bhakti. 
The second adjective, apratihat, "uninterrupted" or "unob- structed," indicates that a devotee never gives up bhakti. On all other paths, the means of attainment comes to an end once the goal has been achieved. In the case of bhakti, however, engage- ment in loving devotion becomes the liberated nature of the self and thus continues even after attainment of the perfected state. In ordinary life, we forsake one activity for another, if we find the latter to be more profitable or pleasurable. Since there is nothing more rewarding and satisfying than bhakti, a devotee has no reason to give it up. 
Conversely, one can also give up an action if it is distressful and there is some alternative action that is found to be less painful. Since there is nothing more painful than being deprived of bhakti, one would never abandon it. The best example in this regard is that of the great devotee Prahlada. He was just a five-year-old boy and hence quite helpless. His father, Hiranyakasipu, was a vehement atheist and the most powerful person in the three worlds, yet he could not make his son give up bhakti. Although he tortured his own son in unimaginable ways, Prahlada never relinquished his bhakti, because giving that up would have been more painful for him than any act of torture meted out by his father. 
In order to further specify the nature of the para-dharma men- tioned in SB 1.2.6, Śrī Jīva refers to SB 1.2.13, in which Śrī Sūta declares that the perfection of dharma is in giving pleasure to Śrī Krṣṇa, hari-toṣaṇam. In other words, the highest dharma is that which brings delight to Krsna. It is indeed only bhakti that can do so, as Kṛṣṇa Himself divulges to Uddhava: 
51I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
My dear Uddhava, neither the practice of yoga, nor sänkhya, nor attention to prescribed religious duties (dharma), nor the study of the Vedas, nor penance, nor renunciation can subdue Me as does all-powerful devotion rendered unto Me. (SB 11.14.20)10 
This means that even if one follows the path of self-inquiry, jñāna-yoga, it has nothing directly to do with the pleasure of Bha- gavän. Although Śrī Jiva acknowledges that the path of jñāna is a form of sammukhya because it involves the directing of one's regard toward the unqualified Absolute, Brahman, such turning of regard is devoid of the immediate awareness of Bhagavan. In this respect, jñāna-yoga is virtually indistinguishable from the routine state of disaffected regard in respect to the Absolute as Bhagavan. This is the intention of Sri Narada's statement quoted in the text (SB 1.5.12). Thus, bhakti alone is the supreme duty of every human being (SB 1.2.13). 
10 
na sadhayati māṁ yogo na sankhyam dharma uddhava 
na svadhyāyas tapas tyāgo yatha bhaktir mamorjitā 
2 
