+++
title = "005"
+++
The Futility of Dharma Not Culminating 
in Bhakti 
५ । व्यतिरेकेणाह ( भा० ११२१८) - 
REASONING by means of vyatireka, or "negative concomitance," Sūta Gosvāmī says: 
धर्मः स्वनुष्ठितः पुंसां वासुदेवकथासु यः । नोत्पादयेद् यदि रतिं श्रम एव हि केवलम् ॥ १२ ॥ 
If the conventional dharma prescribed for human beings is meticulously carried out and yet does not induce attraction for the narrations of Bhagavan Vasudeva, such dharma is decidedly only fruitless labor indeed. (SB 1.2.8) 1 
वासुदेवतोषणाभावेन यदि तत्कथासु तत्तल्लीलावर्णनेषु रतिं रुचिं नोत्पादयेत् तदा श्रमः स्यान् न तु फलम् । कथारुचेः सर्वत्रैवाद्यत्वात् श्रेष्ठत्वाच्च सैवोक्ता । तदुपलक्षणत्वेन भजनान्तररुचिरप्युपदिष्टा । एवशब्देन प्रवृत्तिलक्षणकर्मफलस्य स्वर्गादिः क्षयिष्णुत्वम् । हिशब्देन तत्रैव च “तद् यथेह कर्मजितो लोकः क्षीयते" ( छा० ८।१।६) इति सोपपत्तिकश्रुतिप्रमाणत्वम् । 
If conventional dharma, because it is devoid of immediate relation to the pleasure of Bhagavan Vasudeva, does not induce rati (attraction), meaning a taste ( ruci) for hearing His narrations, namely, the descriptions of His līlās, it is mere labor devoid of 
1 dharmah svanusthitaḥ pumsam vasudeva-kathāsu yaḥ 
notpadayed yadi ratim srama eva hi kevalam 
58 
5 The Futility of Dharma Not Culminating in Bhakti 
any fruit. The taste for hearing the stories of Bhagavan (kathāruci) has been specifically mentioned here, because the taste for hearing is in every case the primary step and also the most significant. The mention of "a taste for Bhagavan's stories," implies a taste for other types of bhajana as well. 
The emphatic particle eva, "only" [which is used to underscore the futility of such labor (śrama)], indicates the perishability of the heavenly realm and other similar results that are the fruit of such goal-oriented prescribed duties. In this particular regard, the word hi, "indeed," implies that this conclusion is corroborated by the evidence of the Śruti, as in the following dialectical statement from Chandogya Upanisad: "Just as in this world, the results acquired by conditional action perish, so too in the other world [i.e.,heaven], the results attained through virtuous action also come to an end" (CHU 8.1.6)? 
" निर्णीत केवलम् ” इत्यमरकोषात् केवलमित्यव्ययेन निवृत्तिमात्रलक्षणधर्मफलस्य च ज्ञानस्यासाध्यत्वं सिद्धस्यापि नश्वरत्वं तत्रापि तेनैव हिशब्देन "यस्य देवे परा भक्तिः” (श्वे०६।२३) इत्यादिश्रुतिप्रमाणत्वम् “नैष्कर्म्यमप्यच्युतभाववर्जितम्” ( भा० ११५/१२) इत्यादि "श्रेयः सृतिं भक्तिमुदस्य ते विभो क्लिश्यन्ति ये केवलबोधलब्धये" ( भा० १०।१४।४) इत्यादि “आरुह्य कृच्छ्रेण परं पदं ततः पतन्त्यधोऽनादृतयुष्मदङ्घ्रयः " ( भा० १० | २ | ३२) इत्यादि वचनप्रमाणत्वं च सूचितम् । 
According to the Amara-kosa lexicon (3.3.204), the indeclinable word kevalam [also being used here to stress the fruitlessness of such labor] means, "decidedly." The word kevalam thus indicates that the immediate intuition (jñāna) [of the self or Brahman] is unattainable as the result of prescribed action (dharma) performed simply as a matter of duty [if such nivṛtti-dharma is devoid of devotion]; and even if such insight (jñāna) is obtained at all, it is also transitory. 
2 
3 
In this respect as well, the same word hi implies that this conclusion is validated by the evidence of the Śruti, as in the following statement: "The imports of the teachings described in 
tad yatheha karma-jito lokaḥ kṣiyate evam evāmutra punya-jito lokaḥ kṣiyate. nirnite kevalam 
59 
59 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
this Upanisad are revealed only to that elevated soul in whom transcendental devotion for Bhagavan is present and who feels the same quality of devotion for his guru as felt for Bhagavan" (SU 6.23).* 
In the same connection again, the word hi implies that the above conclusion is validated [through negative concomitance as well] by scriptural evidence, such as the following three statements from Srimad Bhāgavata: "Even naiṣkarmya-jñāna, or the awareness that pertains to the very nature of Brahman, which frees one from all taints (nirañjanam), is inadequately illuminating if devoid of devotional affect (bhava) for Bhagavan Acyuta [Śrī Kṛṣṇa]" (SB 1.5.12);5 "O almighty Lord, those who discard bhakti unto You, which is the means to supreme blessedness, and strive instead to attain realization of the radically unqualified Absolute, are left in the end with nothing more than their own labor, like those engaged in threshing coarse husks devoid of grain" (SB 10.14.4); and, "O lotus-eyed Lord, those who consider themselves as liberated, having elevated themselves to an exalted status through great hardship, but who then disregard Your lotus feet, fall down from that position" (SB 10.2.32)? 
श्लोकद्वयेन भक्तिर्निरपेक्षा ज्ञानवैराग्ये तु तत्सापेक्षे इति लभ्यते । तदेवं भक्तिफलत्वेनैव धर्मस्य साफल्यमुक्तम् ॥ 
From these two verses [SB 1.2.7-8, quoted at the beginning of Anucchedas 4 and 5, respectively], it is understood that bhakti is independent, whereas jñāna and vairagya depend on bhakti. In this manner, dharma is said to be fruitful only when it results in bhakti. 
6 
. 
60 
yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tathā gurau 
tasyaite kathita hy arthaḥ prakasante mahātmanaḥ 
naişkarmyam apy acyuta-bhava-varjitam na sobhate jñānam alam niranjanam Sreyah-sṛtim bhaktim udasya te vibho klisyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye 
ye nye ravindakça vimukta-maninas tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha buddhayah aruhya kṛcchreṇa param padam tataḥ patanty adho'nadṛta-yusmad anghrayaḥ 
5 The Futility of Dharma Not Culminating in Bhakti 
Commentary 
POSITIVE and negative inferences (anvaya-vyatireka) are used concomitantly to firmly establish a thesis. Śrī Sūta applies this same strategy to corroborate that bhakti is the only abhidheya. All other processes that are not mixed with bhakti and that do not result in bhakti are ultimately useless, a waste of time and effort. They may bring some temporary relief, but even this outcome will not be sustainable. 
In SB 1.2.6, the word dharma was qualified by the adjective para ("the highest"), and both words taken together were understood to refer to sadhana-bhakti, the means to sadhya-bhakti. Then in SB 1.2.7, knowledge and detachment were said to be the concomitant results of bhakti. Now, in SB 1.2.8, the word dharma is used without any adjective. Thus, in this statement it does not refer to sadhana-bhakti but to the prescribed duties ordained in śāstra, as defined by Jaimini: "That which is characterized by an injunction and is beneficial is called dharma" (codanā-lakṣaṇo'rtho dharmaḥ, Jaimini-sutra 1.1.2). This dharma is also termed as varṇāśrama-dharma, karma, or karma-yoga. 
In this verse, Śrī Sūta refutes the proposition that such karmayoga can be accepted as the abhidheya. Karma-yoga is of two types, namely, that which is performed with a material motive (sakāma), and that which is performed for the sake of duty alone, without any material motive (niskāma). The first variety leads to some particular material benefit, which is always temporary. The second variety leads either to the attainment of heaven (GITA 9.20) or to jñāna (GĪTĀ 4.33). The sojourn in heaven is temporary (GĪTĀ 9.21) and not entirely free of suffering. Jñana, on the other hand, can lead to the realization of Brahman but not to sammukhya of Bhagavan. 
Earlier (in the commentary on Anuccheda 3), it was pointed out that from the perspective of bhagavat-sammukhya, identity with Brahman is indistinguishable from the state of disaffected regard in respect to the Absolute as Bhagavan (bhagavad-vaimukhya). Bhakti alone bestows awareness of Bhagavan; for this reason, both karma-yoga and jñāna-yoga devoid of bhakti have been denied as 
61I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
the abhidheya, or the independent means to the realization of Bhagavan. In support of this conclusion, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi cites three verses, SB 1.5.12, SB 10.14.4, and SB 10.2.32, spoken by Śrī Nārada, Śrī Brahma, and the devas, respectively. 
The following objection may be raised in regard to the principal verse of this anuccheda (SB 1.2.8). When a sentence is framed by the word "if" (yadi), the statement is normally to be taken as conjectural, implying a possibility. For example, in the sentence, "If you go to Vrindavan, you will see temples of Krsna," the statement would be meaningless if there was no possibility that the person to whom it was spoken could ever visit Vrindavan. The statement is made in the knowledge that the person in question has the capacity and the opportunity of one day visiting Vrindavan. 
Correspondingly, in SB 1.2.8, the clause "if dharma does not give rise to a taste for the narrations of Vasudeva" (dharmah yadi vasudeva-kathāsu ratim notpadayed) implies that there is a possibility that dharma (i.e., karma-yoga) could in certain circumstances generate such a taste. Since hearing about Krsna is itself bhakti, the conjecture would appear to suggest that it is possible for bhakti to ensue from the proper execution of karma-yoga. This idea, however, contradicts the principle that bhakti is causeless (ahaituki), meaning that it is its own cause. This was also elaborated earlier in Anuccheda 3. 
In reply to this objection, it is to be noted that the word yadi has not been used here in the sense of conjecture but as a form of censure (garha), which is one of its meanings according to the Medini dictionary (yadi garha-vikalpayoḥ, 2.39). The idea is that because the execution of dharma without bhakti is only fruitless labor, it is devoid of ultimate value and hence fit to be discarded. This conclusion, however, appears to be contradicted by the following statement of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Uddhava: 
62 
5 The Futility of Dharma Not Culminating in Bhakti 
While existing in this world, being established in one's prescribed duties, abstaining from forbidden acts, and thus remaining pure at heart, a person attains unqualified awareness (jñāna) or, by divine will (yadṛcchaya), devotion unto Me. (SB 11.20.11) 
From this statement, it would appear that one can attain either jñāna or bhakti by adhering to one's dharma. If this is the case, the above interpretation of the word yadi would not be validated. In reply, it must be pointed out that the verse has used the word yadṛcchaya (lit., "by the will of whom") in syntactical connection with bhakti. This term implies that bhakti does not ensue as an effect of karma-yoga but appears by her own will. Bhakti, as a unique function of Bhagavan's own intrinsic potency of consciousness and bliss, makes her appearance in a person's heart only by her independent will or grace, yadṛcchaya. The conclusion is that karma-yoga can lead to jñāna but not to bhakti. 
Alternatively, it can be explained that the word yadi has been used in this verse in a rhetorical sense to acknowledge a possibility that does not exist in any factual sense, as in the popular saying, yadi vedaḥ pramāṇam - "If the Vedas can be taken as a means of valid knowing..." This use of a conditional sentence construction does not mean to suggest that the Vedas may not be a valid source of knowledge, but rather that their authority is so absolute that whatever they assert is certainly to be taken as conclusive. Linguistically, this type of construction involves positing a possibility to express a certainty. In like manner, there is no possibility that karma-yoga could give rise to bhakti in the form of a taste for hearing the narrations of Vasudeva, yet this has been posited as a possibility just to emphasize the pointlessness of dharma devoid of bhakti. The conclusion is that only bhakti is the abhidheya. The same type of construction is found in SB 11.4.10 (yadi tvam avita, "If You are the protector of Your devotees ..."), discussed in Anuccheda 64. 
From yet another perspective, it could be reasoned that if karma-yoga is offered to Bhagavan, it may then lead to katha-ruci. 
8 
asmin loke vartamānah sva-dharma-stho'naghaḥ śuciḥ 
jñānam visuddham apnoti mad-bhaktim va yadṛcchaya 
63 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
In this case as well, katha-ruci would not be the outcome of karmayoga but of bhakti in the form of offering one's actions to Bhagavān and fulfilling His order to execute one's duty and make such an offering. Injunctions of this type are found in GĪTĀ 3.30, 9.27, and in SB 11.2.36. The rationale being considered here finds support in the following statement of Śrī Kṛṣṇa: 
Assiduously pursuing one's own duties, a person attains perfection. Please hear how one engaged in his own duties attains perfection. One attains perfection by worshiping God, from whom the actions of all beings originate and by whom this entire cosmos is pervaded, through the execution of one's own duties. (GĪTĀ 18.45-46)" 
Here Śrī Kṛṣṇa states that by worshiping God through one's own prescribed duties, perfection is attained. Thus, even if this line of reasoning is adopted, the conclusion remains that karma-yoga alone without recourse to bhakti cannot yield perfection. 
In the verse under discussion (SB 1.2.8), the three indeclinables - eva ("only"), hi ("indeed"), and kevalam ("decidedly") — are used to highlight the futility of karma-yoga devoid of bhakti. Additionally, these emphatic particles signify that any result that one achieves by sakāma-karma or niṣkāma-karma in the form of heaven or unqualified awareness is perishable. Taken together, SB 1.2.7 and SB 1.2.8 establish the fact that bhakti is independent of karma-yoga and jñāna-yoga and that the latter two are dependent on bhakti in order to yield their respective results. 
In the same verse (SB 1.2.8), Suta does not use the word bhakti but the phrase vasudeva-kathāsu ratim, "a taste for hearing the stories of Krsna," which is a limb of bhakti. This is significant, because taste or attraction for hearing is the first step in bhakti. In fact, the sustained interest to hear about, and thus give attention to, a subject is the beginning of any knowledge discipline, material or spiritual. One becomes adept in that field about which one is naturally 
9 
sve sve karmany abhirataḥ samsiddhim labhate narah sva-karma-nirataḥ siddhim yatha vindati tac chṛṇu yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānām yena sarvam idam tatam sva-karmaņā tam abhyarcya siddhim vindati mänavaḥ 
64 
5 The Futility of Dharma Not Culminating in Bhakti 
drawn to hear. By extension, hearing is indicative of reading and reflection as well. 
In the next anuccheda, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī refutes the idea that dharma is meant for material prosperity (artha) and that artha is to be used for sense pleasure (kama). Rather, the real purpose of life is inquiry into Truth. 
65 
