+++
title = "006"
+++
The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga — Meaning Bhakti 
६ । तत्र यदन्ये मन्यन्ते - धर्मस्यार्थः फलं तस्य कामस्तस्य चेन्द्रियप्रीतिस्तत्प्रीतेश्च पुनरपि धर्मादिपरम्परेति तच् चान्यथैवेत्याह द्वाभ्याम् (भा० १।२।९–१०) – 
IN THIS matter [of determining dharma's purpose], there are others who hold the following view: "Dharma's result (phala), or intended aim, is prosperity (artha), and prosperity leads to the appropriation of the sense objects (kāma). From the appropriation of sense objects, sensual satisfaction ensues, and this in turn leads again to a new cycle of dharma, and so on." This view is certainly not in accord with reality, as Sūta Gosvāmi makes evident in the following two verses: 
धर्मस्य ह्यापवर्ग्यस्य नार्थोऽर्थायोपकल्पते । नार्थस्य धर्मैकान्तस्य कामो लाभाय हि स्मृतः ॥ १३ ॥ 
कामस्य नेन्द्रियप्रीतिर्लाभो जीवेत यावता । 
जीवस्य तत्त्वजिज्ञासा नार्थो यश्चेह कर्मभिः ॥ १४ ॥ 
Dharma that conduces to liberation (apavargya) does not have prosperity (artha) as its objective. Prosperity, which is the unfailing attendant of such dharma, does not have the appropriation of sense objects (kāma) as its intended aim; so it has been attested to (smṛtah) [by those who have realized the Truth]. The 
appropriation of sense objects is not meant for sensual pleasure 
99 
66 
6 The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga - Meaning Bhakti 
(indriya-priti), but only for requisite life sustenance. The purpose of life is to inquire into the Absolute and not to procure the benefit (artha) [of heaven, renowned] in this world by carrying out one's prescribed duties. (SB 1.2.9-10)1 
आपवर्ग्यस्य – “यथावर्णविधानमपवर्गश्च भवति । योऽसौ भगवति सर्वात्मन्यनात्म्येऽनिरुक्तेऽनिलयने परमात्मनि वासुदेवेऽनन्यनिमित्तभक्तियोगलक्षणो नानागतिनिमित्ताविद्याग्रन्थिरन्धनद्वारेण यदा हि महापुरुषपुरुषप्रसङ्गः” (भा०५।१९।१९-२० ) इति पञ्चमस्कन्धगद्यानुसारेणापवर्गो भक्तिः । 
The word apavargyasya, "of that [dharma] which conduces to liberation," [is being examined here]. According to the following prose passage from the Fifth Canto of Srimad Bhagavata, the word apavarga, "liberation," means "bhakti": 
By following one's prescribed duty according to the varna system, one also obtains liberation (apavarga). [What the intrinsic nature of apavarga is and how or when it is obtained is now being described:] It is only when one obtains the elevated association of a being who is wholly given over to the Supreme Being that one attains causeless bhakti-yoga for Bhagavan Väsudeva, who is the Supreme Immanent Self, the Soul of all beings, free from attachment, beyond mind and speech, and the very ground of His own being. Through bhakti of this constitution, the knot of ignorance, which is the cause of attaining various grades of physical embodiment, is cut asunder [and accordingly bhakti is esteemed as apavarga]. (SB 5.19.19-20)2 
तथा च स्कान्दे रेवाखण्डे- 
The same point is made in the Reva-khanda of the Skanda Purana: 
1 
2 
dharmasya hy ãpavargyasya nartho'rthayopakalpate 
nārthasya dharmaikāntasya kāmo labhaya hi smṛtaḥ 
kamasya nendriya pritir labho jiveta yāvată 
jivasya tattva-jijñāsā nārtho yas ceha karmabhih 
yatha-varṇa-vidhanam apavargas ca bhavati. yo'sau bhagavati sarvātmany anatmye'nirukte nilayane paramatmani vasudeve'nanya-nimitta-bhakti-yogalakṣaṇo nānā-gati-nimittävidya-granthi-randhana-dvāreņa yada hi 
mahāpurusa-purusa-prasangah. 
67 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
निश्चला त्वयि भक्तिर्या सैव मुक्तिर्जनार्दन । 
मुक्ता एव हि भक्तास्ते तव विष्णो यतो हरे ॥ १५ ॥ इति । 
O Bhagavän Janardana, resolute bhakti for You is indeed mukti, or "liberation." Therefore, O Bhagavan Viṣṇu, O Hari, only those who are already liberated can be Your devotees. (Skanda Purāna)3 
तत उक्तरीत्या भक्तिसम्पादकस्येत्यर्थः । 
Thus, from the above statements, the word apavargyasya [which qualifies the word dharma in SB 1.2.9] means, "that which conduces to bhakti." 
टीका च - " अर्थाय फलत्वाय । अर्थो नोपकल्पते योग्यो न भवति तथार्थस्याप्येवम्भूतधर्माव्यभिचारिणः कामो लाभाय फलत्वाय न हि स्मृतस्तत्त्वविद्भिः । कामस्य विषयभोगस्येन्द्रियप्रीतिर्लाभः फलं न भवति किन्तु यावता जीवेत तावानेव कामस्य लाभस्तादृशजीवनपर्याप्ति एव कामः सेव्य इत्यर्थः । जीवस्य जीवनस्य च पुनर्धर्मानुष्ठानद्वारा कर्मभिर्य इह प्रसिद्धः स्वर्गादिः सोऽर्थो न भवति किन्तु तत्त्वजिज्ञासैव " इति । 
Śrīdhara Svāmī comments as follows on the two verses under discussion (SB 1.2.9-10): "The word arthaya means 'for the purpose of,' and in conjunction with the words artho nopakalpate, the meaning is that 'prosperity is unsuited to be the intended aim' [of such dharma]. Additionally, those who have directly realized the Truth have attested (smrtah) that the appropriation of sense objects (kama) is not the intended aim (läbhāya) of prosperity (artha), which is the unfailing attendant of such dharma. The purpose of kama, or in other words, of the appropriation of objects willfully attended to (viṣaya-bhoga), is not sensual pleasure (indriya-priti) but requisite life sustenance. Only up to this extent does the appropriation of sense objects (kāma) have a purpose, meaning that such appropriation (kāma) is serviceable only to the degree required for the preservation of life. The purpose of life is not to procure the benefit (artha), so greatly renowned in this world, of attaining heaven by the execution 
3 niscala tvayi bhaktir ya saiva muktir janardana 
mukta eva hi bhaktās te tava visno yato hare 
68 
6 The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga - Meaning Bhakti 
of dharma, but only to inquire into the Absolute." [Here ends śridhara Svāmī's comment.] 
तदेवं तत्त्वज्ञानं यस्या भक्तेरवान्तरफलमुक्तं सैव परमं फलमिति भावः । 
In this manner, knowledge of the Absolute (tattva-jnāna) is said to be the concomitant result (avāntara-phala) of bhakti, whereas bhakti itself is the supreme result (parama-phala). This is the intended sense. 
किं तत्त्वम् ? इत्यपेक्षायां पद्यमेकं तूदाहृतम् (भा० १।२1११ ) - 
What then is the Absolute (tattvam)? In anticipation of this question, Śrī Sūta spoke the following verse: 
वदन्ति तत् तत्त्वविदस्तत्त्वं यज् ज्ञानमद्वयम् । ब्रह्मेति परमात्मेति भगवानिति शब्धते ॥ १६ ॥ इति । 
Those who have directly realized the Absolute (tattva-vidaḥ) describe that Absolute (tattva) as nondual consciousness (advaya-jnana ). It is denoted by the words brahman, paramātmā, and bhagavān. (SB 1.2.11 ) 4 
I 
अद्वयमिति तस्याखण्डत्वं निर्दिश्यान्यस्य तदनन्यत्वविवक्षया तच्छक्तित्वमेवाङ्गीकरोति । तत्र शक्तिवर्गलक्षणतद्धर्मातिरिक्तं केवलं ज्ञानं ब्रह्मेति शब्द्यते । अन्तर्यामित्वमयमायाशक्तिप्रचुरचिच्छक्त्यंशविशिष्टं परमात्मेति । परिपूर्णसर्वशक्तिविशिष्टं भगवानिति । विवृतं चैतत् प्राक्तनसन्दर्भत्रयेण ॥ 
After specifying the indivisibility of the Absolute by the word "nondual" (advayam), Süta acknowledges all else as the energy (śakti) of the Absolute, just to make it clear that there is nothing separate or independent from It. In this regard, when the nondual Absolute is disclosed as consciousness alone, devoid of Its attributes in the form of various potencies, It is called Brahman. When the same Absolute is disclosed in Its feature of Supreme Immanence, qualified by an abundance of the extrinsic potency (māyā-śakti) and by the integrated parts belonging to 
4 
vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam yaj-jñānam advayam 
brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti sabdyate 
69 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
Its conscious potency (cit-śakti), It is called Paramātmā. The same Absolute, possessing all potencies in utter completion, is called Bhagavan. This topic has been elaborated in the first three Sandarbhas. 
Commentary 
IN THE PRINCIPAL VERSE from the previous anuccheda (SB 1.2.8), Sūta Gosvāmī made the point that dharma properly executed is meant to lead to a taste in hearing about Krsna; otherwise it is reduced to labor alone, devoid of essential value. The general belief, however, is that dharma results in prosperity (artha), which is meant to facilitate kāma, or in other words, the appropriation of objects willfully attended to (viṣaya-bhoga). Recognizing the prominence of this view, Śrī Sūta dismisses it as being out of accord with reality in the next two verses from the same series (SB 1.2.9-10). This forms the major point of discussion in the present anuccheda. 
The common view of dharma just referred to is illustrated in the following popular verse spoken by Śrī Vyasadeva: 
Though I am shouting with upraised arms, "Dharma results in artha and kāma," no one cares to listen to me. Dharma being such, what possible reason could there be for not taking to it? (Mahabharata, Svargārohanika-parva 5.49)5 
From this verse, it is construed that dharma is the means to artha and kāma. Sūta, however, denies this vehemently. To understand his intention, let us first clarify what dharma, artha, and kama actually mean. In its operational structure, Vedic society was divided into four vocational classifications, called varnas, and four stages of life, called asramas. Originally, the varņas were determined on the basis of a person's nature and the corresponding work that he or she performed. According to the preponderance of the three gunas of material nature, the four varnas have 
5 urdhva-bahur viraumy esa na ca kaścic chṛnoti me 
dharmad arthas ca kamaś ca sa kim-artham na sevyate 
70 
6 The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga - Meaning Bhakti 
7 
been categorized and designated as brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, and śūdra. 
A brahmana is characterized as a person in whom is found a predominance of sattva-guna, which is supported by rajas with tamas in a state of arrest. A brāhmaṇa is naturally drawn to the cultivation of wisdom, devoted to truth, and established in mental and sensual regulation, simplicity, cleanliness, and self-satisfaction. A kṣatriya is characterized as a person in whom is found a predominance of rajas, which is supported by sattva with tamas in arrest. A ksatriya is inclined to management, governance, courageous and chivalrous actions, and providing protection. He is forbearing and charitable and loves to fight for a just cause. 
A vaiśya is characterized as a person in whom is found a predominance of rajas, which is supported by tamas with sattva in arrest. A vaisya is predisposed to farming, animal protection (especially of cows), and business enterprise meant to facilitate a community. He takes satisfaction in providing for others' basic needs. A sūdra is characterized as a person in whom is found a predominance of tamas, which is supported by rajas with sattva in arrest. A sūdra is prone to be of service to others and is not inclined to education, management, or business. 
In the above classification, it is understood that sattva, which is illuminating by nature, cannot be supportive of or supported by tamas, which is deluding by nature. Hence, these two gunas, each supported only by rajas, lead to the formation of two distinct varnas. Rajas, on the other hand, being supported either by sattva or tamas, generates two further varnas. Thus, according to this scheme, only four varnas are theoretically possible. There are, of course, varieties of constitution within each varna because of alterations in the proportions of the three gunas that contribute to the formation of nature, but primarily there are four types of human beings. This is outlined by Śrī Kṛṣṇa: 
According to the Puranas, the four vocational classifications (varnas) are found not only in human beings but in other species as well, such as animals, birds, and even plants. This demonstrates the universal nature of these divisions, which cut across not only cultural distinctions but those related to genus as well. 
71I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
The four divisions of human society (varnas) were created by Me in accordance with the preponderance of the gunas operative in different people and in accordance with the corresponding character of their actions. Although I am the originator of this system, know Me, the imperishable, as the nondoer [being beyond the gunas and changeless]. (GĪTĀ 4.13)" 
Later, however, the varnas came to be designated on the basis of birth alone. The reason for this alteration was pragmatic in nature. It was not easy to ascertain a child's varna without studying his or her behavior. By the time such an evaluation could be made, the child would already have grown, and in the meantime, the appropriate training could not be administered since the varna remained undetermined. Moreover, the matter would be further complicated if different family members had different varnas. Considering all these difficulties, the varnas came to be fixed on the basis of birth by the authors of the Smrtis, such as Manu. This also led to the restriction on inter-varna marriages. 
The Vedic ṛsis understood the importance of human life and thus planned society in such a manner that everybody could progress toward realization of the Absolute. In this regard, they established four human pursuits, called puruṣārthas, namely, dharma, artha, kāma, and mokṣa. Of these, the first three are related to the material body and mind, while the fourth is related to the self, our real identity. Of the four puruṣārthas, dharma and artha are not ends in and of themselves but only means to an end. On this consideration, only kama and mokşa are genuine puruṣārthas in the sense of actual ends to be attained. Bearing this in mind, the intended sequence has been determined as dharma, artha, kāma, and mokṣa. 
Dharma is the first puruṣārtha to be attended to, because if one does not adhere to dharma, then the artha and kama that are secured through adharmika means will lead ultimately to ruination. Certainly, mokṣa is entirely out of the question for a person of 
7 
caturvarnyam maya sṛṣṭaṁh guna-karma-vibhāgaśaḥ 
tasya kartāram api mam viddhy akartāram avyayam 
72 
6 The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga - Meaning Bhakti 
such disposition. Dharma is thus recognized as the foundation of all puruṣārthas, as clearly expressed in the following verses: 
Dharma is so-called because it upholds (dhāraṇā). Dharma upholds all human beings. Whatever is endowed with the capacity to uphold is concluded to be dharma. (Mahabharata, Karna-parva 69.58)8 
And: 
If destroyed, dharma itself will bring destruction; whereas, if protected, dharma will provide protection. Therefore, I will not forsake dharma, so that dharma, abandoned, should not annihilate me. (Mahabharata, Vana-parva 313.128) 
Manu also advises, "All artha and kama that are devoid of dharma are to be given up" (Manu-smrti 4.176).10 
Dharma is a disciplined state of being that maintains balance in one's individual life and society at large. Dharma protects one from succumbing to greed for artha and thus engaging in illegal means to procure wealth. Dharma also safeguards one from ruining one's health and wastefully depleting resources by engaging in unrestricted sense enjoyment. Modern society is based on the principles of artha and kama only. Therefore, people in general are mentally stressed, physically sick, and economically always in crisis. If one is rooted in dharma, then his or her pursuits of artha and kāma will be productive of well-being and will conduce to the realization of the Absolute, mokṣa, the fourth goal of life. It is with this intent that Vyasa laments in the Mahabharata verse cited above, seeing that people are disinterested in dharma. 
Kautilya, the author of the Artha-sastra, is also in accord with the above view, as evidenced in the following statement: "The appropriation of sense objects is to be undertaken [by a king] 
8 
dharaṇad dharma ity ahur dharmo dharayati prajāḥ 
yat syad dharaṇa-samyuktam sa dharma iti niscayah 
9 dharma eva hato hanti dharmo raksati rakṣitaḥ 
10 
tasmad dharmam na tyajāmi mā no dharmo hato'vadhit parityajed artha-kamau yau syātam dharma-varjitau 
73 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
without contravening the principles of dharma and without hindering prosperity" (dharmarthāvirodhena kamaṁ seveta, Arthasastra 1.3.6.3). Vatsyayana goes a step further. He says that human śāstra beings should engage in dharma, artha, and kama with regard to the appropriateness of time and in such a manner that the three are interlinked and in no way detrimental to each other (Kāma-sūtra 2.1)." 
These are the opinions of the propounders of the Dharma-sastra, Artha-sastra, and Kama-sastra, and they are highly practical recommendations to enable people to function peacefully in society. Sūta Gosvāmi, however, has an altogether different view about the purpose of dharma, artha, and kama and about the ultimate purpose of life. He avows that the purpose of dharma is apavarga. 
The word apavarga conventionally means "liberation from conditional existence," mukti, as stated in Amara-kośa, muktiḥ kaivalyanirvana-śreyo-niḥśreyasāmṛtam mokso'pavargaḥ, "The words apavarga, kaivalya, and so on, are all synonyms for mukti" (Amarakośa 1.5.6). Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi shows, however, that because apavarga ensues from and culminates in bhakti, it is synonymous with the latter. In the Fifth Canto passage cited in this anuccheda (SB 5.19.1920), Śrī Sukadeva first speaks of the attainment of apavarga and then specifies its intrinsic nature as causeless bhakti-yoga. 
Consequently, to take the meaning of the word apavarga (in SB 1.2.9) as bhakti is certainly in harmony with the immediately preceding verse (SB 1.2.8), discussed in the previous anuccheda. In the latter verse, Suta denigrates even dharma meticulously performed if it does not give rise to bhakti. By this he implies that dharma is not meant to be used for artha or kama, which is the common belief held by the propagators of the sastras related to dharma, artha, and kāma. This belief is corroborated by the statement of Vyasa cited above. The reasoning that informs such a belief is rooted in the understanding that material nature, being presided over by various devas, supplies humanity's needs if they follow their dharma. Kṛṣṇa conveys this view to Arjuna in the following verses: 
satayur vai puruso vibhajya kalam anyo'nyanubaddham parasparasyanupaghatakam trivargam seveta 
74 
6 The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga - Meaning Bhakti 
In the beginning of creation, after Brahma brought forth humankind along with the performance of yajña," he said, "You shall prosper by this yajña. May it become that which fulfills all objects of longing desired by you. Nourish the devas through this yajña, and [by so doing] may the devas be gracious to you. Thus, through mutual benevolence, you shall attain the highest good." (GĪTĀ 3.1011) 13 
Indeed, all these knowers of yajña, who are purified of their unmeritorious acts through the performance of yajña and who partake in the ambrosial remnants of yajña, attain the eternal Brahman. O best of the Kurus, even this human world [of meager pleasure] is inaccessible for one who does not perform yajña, to say nothing of the other [heavenly world of celestial pleasure]. (GITA 4.30-31)14 
The word yajña in these verses is synonymous with dharma or karma15 The principle of yajña as a subtle technology for harmonious living in the world is something unknown to modern human beings. The blessings that nature holds in store are available to us either through reverential regard extended in the form of ritual offerings (yajña) or by conquering and exploiting nature. The first strategy is prescribed by the Vedas and was a pervasive feature of the ancient culture of India. Modern humanity reduces nature to a lifeless object to be conquered, instead of recognizing it as a living potency of the divine worthy of reverential care. The result of such 
12 Yajna is a Vedic ritualistic ceremony meant to please the devas who oversee the 
administrative affairs of the universe. The word yajña also refers to Bhagavan Visņu Himself. The Vedas enjoin: yajño vai visnuh, "Yajña is itself Visnu." This meaning is also supported by GITA 3.15 and 3.30. 
13 saha-yajñaḥ prajah sṛstva purovaca prajapatiḥ 
anena prasavisyadhvam esa vo'stv ista-kama-dhuk devän bhāvayatānena te deva bhavayantu vaḥ parasparam bhavayantaḥ śreyaḥ param avapsyatha sarve'py ete yajña-vido yajña-kṣapita-kalmaṣaḥ yajña-sistamṛta-bhujo yanti brahma sanatanam nayam loko'sty ayajñasya kuto'nyah kurusattama yajñaḥ karma-samudbhavaḥ 
14 
15 
GĪTĀ 3.14 
75 
75 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
an attitude is only struggle and frustration. Our minds and bodies - the very instruments by which we strive to conquer natureare themselves tiny extensions of nature. In such an enterprise, there is no possibility of victory, just as a finger cannot control the body to which it belongs. By trying to control nature, humanity in reality becomes controlled by it, though it remains heedlessly unaware of this fact. 
The important words to note in Kṛṣṇa's instructions are śreyaḥ param, "the supreme good" (in GĪTĀ 3.11), and brahma sanatanam, "the Supreme Truth" (in GITA 4.31). What Kṛṣṇa intends to say is that dharma, in the form of honoring the system of yajña, can grant both the objects of material desire, ista-kama-dhuk, as well as the ultimate benediction in the form of mukti or bhakti. 
Śrī Sūta contends, however, that to fulfill only one's material desires by the rightful execution of one's dharma is not the intended purpose of such an undertaking. Rather, one should aim directly at apavarga. This is the real purpose of dharma. Moreover, Śrī Jiva stresses the fact that apavarga should not be taken to mean mukti but bhakti. In other words, dharma should neither be used for material gain nor for mukti. If the same effort can yield a superior benefit, then why settle for less? Suta thus concludes that to use dharma merely to secure artha, or "prosperity," is a misapplication of the intellect. Dharma's sole purpose is bhakti. This is confirmed in Padma Purāṇa: 
The Supreme Being, Visnu, is worshiped by a human being through adherence to the principles of varnasrama-dharma. There is no other path that leads to His satisfaction [i.e., that leads to bhakti, which is the true cause of His satisfaction]. (VP 3.8.9)16 
People are generally of the opinion that the purpose of wealth is kāma, "the appropriation of sense objects." It is for this reason that the whole world is preoccupied with the acquisition of wealth. On this consideration, Kautilya gives prominence to artha and says that of the three - dharma, artha, and kama - artha is the most 
16 
varṇāśramācāravata purusena paraḥ pumān 
vişnur ärādhyate pantha nanyat tat-toṣa-kāraḥam 
726 
6 The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga - Meaning Bhakti 
important, because the other two depend upon it. Artha is required to engage in dharma in the form of yajña as well as to acquire the objects of enjoyment, kāma."" 
Here it is to be understood that in accordance with their psychological disposition and faith structure, there are four broad classifications of human beings who adhere to a dharmika lifestyle — the karmis, who are drawn to worldly virtue and its benefits through sacramental action; the jñānis, who seek liberation and oneness through self-inquiry; the yogis, who are involved in psychospiritual transformation aiming at a state of divine union; and the bhaktas, who are feelingly surrendered to Bhagavan culminating in the state of divine love.18 
Among these, it is only the karmis, the followers of Purvamīmāmsā, who hold the view that dharma is meant for artha. The dharma of the jñānis is rooted in sensual and mental regulation, nonattachment, self-inquiry, and so on. The yogis' dharma involves moral adaptation (yama and niyama) and integration of body, breath, and mind (asana, prāṇāyāma, pratyāhāra, dhāraṇā, and dhyāna), leading to the state of transcognitive absorption (samadhi). The dharma of the bhaktas is rooted in self-surrender and moment to moment attentive regard of Bhagavan, enacted primarily through the devotional acts of hearing, chanting, and meditating on His divine name, form, lilă, and so on. 
The aim of the latter three classifications of spiritual practitioners is certainly not artha. If any of them do take up their respective dharmas with the intent of achieving artha, then they are misguided. In the case of the jñānis and yogis, the word apavarga means mukti, but for a bhakta, it means bhakti. In Bhagavat Sandarbha (Anucchedas 2-3), it was demonstrated that the realization of unqualified Brahman aimed at by the jñānis and some yogis is an unspecified and hence partial disclosure of the Complete Absolute 
17 artha eva pradhana iti kautilyaḥ 
artha-mulau hi dharma-kāmāv iti Artha-sastra 1.3.6.1 
18 This is understood from GĢĪTĀ 6.46-47. 
77 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
(tattva). On this basis, Śrī Jiva concludes that in its most fundamental sense, dharma is meant only for bhakti, which leads to the self-disclosure of Bhagavan, the complete manifestation of tattva. 
In the second line of SB 1.2.9, Sūta says that artha should be used only for dharma and not for kama. The karmis believe that artha should be used for kama. Kāma, understood as sense pleasure, is formally defined as "the favorable involvement of the auditory, tactile, visual, gustatory, and olfactory sense functions with their respective sense objects - an involvement in which these cognitive functions are administered by the mind, which is in contact with the self" (Kāma-sūtra 2.11) In the verse under discussion, however, the word kama does not refer to sense pleasure (indriyapriti) but to the appropriation of objects that confer the feeling of sense pleasure. This is evident in the verse from the fact that indriya-priti ("sense pleasure") is said to ensue from kāma. Moreover, artha, or "wealth," cannot procure sense pleasure itself but only the sense objects. 
Śri Sūta affirms that kama, or "the appropriation of sense objects" (viṣaya-bhoga), is not meant for sensual gratification, as is understood by the karmis. The sense objects should be consumed only as required for life sustenance. One should not live to eat but eat to live. The genuine jñānīs, yogis, and bhaktas do not strive for sense enjoyment. Jñānis and yogis are of the view that whatever happiness or suffering is obtained in their life is an inevitable outcome of their past karma. They remain equanimous in both circumstances. The bhaktas consider happiness as a concomitant effect of bhakti, whereas they regard suffering either as the grace of Bhagavan to intensify their devotion or as the result of some offense. 
The purpose of life is not sense gratification, as believed by the karmis, but to inquire into the Absolute Reality (tattva). This indeed is the ultimate purpose of life, as expressed in the following 
statement: 
19 śrotra-tvak-cakṣur-jihvā-ghrāṇānām ātma-samyuktena manasadhisthitānām svesu 
sveşu viṣayesv ānukulyataḥ pravṛttiḥ kamah 
78 
6 The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga - Meaning Bhakti 
Although temporary, this rare human body is capable of delivering the ultimate benefit. Thus, having attained it after many births in this world, a wise person should at once endeavor for the supreme goal, before the body, which proceeds inevitably toward death, meets its end. Sense pleasure is of course available in every species of life [but the ultimate benefit is possible only in the human form]. (SB 11.9.29)20 
There are three basic pleasures in material life - food, sex, and sleep. Food (āhāra) includes anything ingested through the external senses, including sound, form, taste, and smell. Sex is related to the tactile sense, and sleep entails the cessation of all external sense functions. These types of pleasure are readily available even in the species of animals, birds, and aquatics. But none of these creatures are endowed with the discriminative or self-reflective capacity whereby they could inquire into and understand the tattva. This capacity is unique to the human form of life. If it is not used for this purpose, then one wastes the precious opportunity he or she has been given. In this regard, Śrī Kṛṣṇa offers the following advice: 
By means of the unreal and mortal body, a person in this very life can attain Me, the Real and Immortal. This indeed is the intelligence of the intelligent and the wisdom of the wise. (SB 11.29.22)21 
It was stated in SB 1.2.7 that knowledge of the Absolute Reality arises as an outcome of bhakti. But what exactly is that Reality? To answer this question, Śrī Sūta speaks the principal verse of this anuccheda, SB 1.2.11. This verse is one of the key verses in Śrīmad Bhagavata, and it is on the basis of this verse that Śrīla Jiva Gosvāmi named the first three of his Sandarbhas, namely, the Tattva, Bhagavat, and Paramaätma Sandarbhas.22 
20 labdhva sudurlabham idam bahu-sambhavante mănuşyam arthadam anityam apiha dhirah tūrṇam yateta na pated anumṛtyu yavan niḥśreyasaya visayah khalu sarvatah syat 
21 
22 
esă buddhimatam buddhir maniṣa ca manīsinām 
yat-satyam anṛteneha martyenäpnoti māmṛtam 
One of the three names used as denotations of the tattva is Brahman. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī did not write a separate Sandarbha to elaborate the topic of Brahman,→ 
79 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
The meaning of this verse has thus been discussed in detail in the first three Sandarbhas. The Absolute Reality (tattva) is one only, and It is conscious by nature. This stands in contradistinction to the absolute idealism of Vijñānavāda Buddhism, which posits reality as no more than momentary consciousness. This tattva is referred to as Brahman by the jñānis, who study the Upanisads and their synthesis in the form of Vedanta-sutra. It is called Paramātmā by the yogis, who meditate on the four-handed form of Viṣṇu immanent within the heart. The very same tattva is denoted as Bhagavan by the devotees, who realize Him both internally and externally as the object of their service and love. It is to be noted that this tattva is not designated by the term jiva. 
This verse thus refutes the philosophy of radical nondualism, Advaitavada, which proclaims that the tattva is devoid of all potency or variety to the very root (kevala-abheda). Rather, on the basis of Śrīmad Bhagavata, Śrī Jiva establishes that the tattva, although nondual in nature, is replete with Its own potencies. This was clearly demonstrated in the first three Sandarbhas. Śrī Jiva agrees, however, with Advaitavada that the tattva is by constitution devoid of the three types of duality, or bheda, namely, svagata-bheda, sajātīya-bheda, and vijātīya-bheda.23 
Of the three self-disclosures of the tattva, Bhagavan is the foundation, whereas Paramātmā and Brahman have their source in Him. Hierarchically speaking, Paramātmā is more complete than Brahman, and Bhagavan is more complete than Paramātmā. To be more precise, Brahman is that disclosure of the one indivisible tattva in which Its potencies remain completely concealed. Paramātmā is that disclosure of the same tattva in which Its potencies remain partially concealed. And Bhagavan is that disclosure of the same tattva in which Its potencies are fully unconcealed. Correspondingly, the realization of the yogis, who are intent upon Paramātmā, is more complete than that of the jñānis, who are intent 
since he considered this topic to be implicit within the discussion of Bhagavan, as he himself clearly states in Bhagavat Sandarbha, Anuccheda 7. 
23 For an explanation of these terms, see Tattva Sandarbha, Anuccheda 51, 
commentary. 
80 
6 The Real Purpose of Dharma Is Apavarga - Meaning Bhakti 
upon Brahman, and the realization of the bhaktas, who are intent upon Bhagavan, is more complete than that of the yogis. With this intention, Krsna says: 
The yogi [who meditates on Paramātma] is superior to the ascetics, superior even to the jñānis [who realize Brahman], and superior to those engaged in the ritualistic performance of karma. This indeed is My opinion. Therefore, Arjuna, be a yogi. And even among all yogis whatsoever, the one who is fully endowed with faith and who worships Me [Bhagavan] with his internal regard resolutely fixed on Me, I consider to be the greatest of those who are united through yoga. (GĪTĀ 6.46-47)24 
This tattva is self-disclosed in completion by bhakti alone. This will be elucidated in the next anuccheda. 
24 
tapasvibhyo'dhiko yogi jñānibhyo'pi mato'dhikaḥ karmibhyaś cadhiko yogi tasmād yogi bhavarjuna yoginām api sarveṣām mad-gatenāntarātmanā śraddhavan bhajate yo mam sa me yuktatamo mataḥ 
81
