+++
title = "009"
+++
Sūta Recommends Direct Engagement in Bhakti 
९ । यद्येवं श्रीहरिसन्तोषकस्यापि धर्मस्य फलं श्रवणादिरुचिलक्षणा भक्तिरेव तदनुगतास्तत्प्रवर्तिताश्च ज्ञानवैराग्यादिगुणा इत्यायातं तदा साक्षाच्छ्रवणादिरूपा भक्तिरेव कर्तव्या । किं तत् तदाग्रहेणेत्याह (भा० १।२।१४ ) - 
IT IS understood from the above discussion that the outcome of dharma performed for the pleasure of Bhagavan Śrī Hari is nothing other than bhakti, which is characterized by a taste for hearing about Bhagavan and other similar devotional acts. Furthermore, bhakti is attended by attributes such as knowledge and detachment, which stem from it. If this is the case, then direct engagement in bhakti in the form of hearing and so on is alone what is imperative to be taken up. Why insist on the execution of prescribed duties or the independent culture of knowledge and detachment? This is precisely the point that Sūta Gosvāmi comes to in the next verse: 
1 
तस्मादेकेन मनसा भगवान् सात्वतां पतिः । 
श्रोतव्यः कीर्तितव्यश्च ध्येयः पूज्यश्च नित्यदा ॥ २० ॥ 
Consequently, with one-pointed mental attention, one should continuously hear about, glorify, meditate on, and worship Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the guardian of His devotees. (SB 1.2.14)1 
tasmäd ekena manasa bhagavan satvatām patiḥ 
śrotavyah kirtitavyaś ca dhyeyah pujyaś ca nityadā 
93 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
एकेन कर्माद्याग्रहशून्येन । श्रवणमत्र नामगुणादीनां तथा कीर्तनञ्च ॥ 
The word ekena, "one-pointed," specifying the quality of mental attention, means "without insistence on the performance of karma and other such pursuits." In this regard, śravaṇam, "hearing," has as its intended object the divine name, qualities, and so on, of Bhagavan. Kirtana, or "glorification," is also concerned with the same. 
Commentary 
FROM the earlier statements of Sūta Gosvāmi, the following points are evident: 
1. The purpose of life is tattva-jijñāsă, inquiry into the Absolute. 2. Knowledge and detachment from material pleasure arise 
naturally to a devotee as concomitant effects of bhakti. 
3. Only pure bhakti makes possible the highest completion of the 
self. 
4. Dharma that does not culminate in bhakti is without ultimate 
value. 
5. The perfection of dharma is in bhakti itself. 
From this consideration, it is concluded that one must somehow attain bhakti. In this respect, it is important to note that bhakti has two stages, namely, the stage of practice (sadhana), and the stage of attainment (sadhya). This implies that bhakti, as a conscious potency intrinsic to the essential being of Bhagavan, partially infuses its nature into the senses in the stage of practice and then discloses itself as prema in the stage of attainment. This is to say that bhakti alone is the cause of its own attainment. Such being the case, the true self's most fundamental function is to engage wholeheartedly in sadhana-bhakti as the gateway to prema. To this end, Sūta Gosvāmi speaks the present verse. 
94 
9 Sūta Recommends Direct Engagement in Bhakti 
In this regard, one may naturally question, what about peoples' responsibilities toward their families, society, and country? Moreover, people need to earn a living just to survive. So how would it even be possible to engage exclusively in bhakti? The solution to this dilemma may be understood as follows. 
It was demonstrated in Paramatma Sandarbha that the living beings' true identity resides in and as the conscious self, but due to the prior absence of awareness of the self, they are identified with the material body and mind, which are products of māyā. Related to these two identities, real and acquired, we have two types of dharma - that which pertains to the authentic self and that which pertains to one's acquired nature. The only real dharma for all living beings is bhakti, while the acquired dharma varies from person to person according to their conditioning by the gunas of prakṛti. 
Taking this into consideration, Sūta Gosvāmī's advice is that even acquired dharma, meaning our duties toward family, society, and country, and the need to earn a living, should be undertaken only for the sake of bhakti, and not independently. This orientation makes it possible for bhakti to be enacted from any position in life. While thus situated, one should also engage as far as possible in direct acts of bhakti, such as hearing about Bhagavan, performing kirtana of His names, and meditating on Him. 
For people in general, it is not feasible to engage full-time in the acts of hearing, chanting, and meditation. As such, one should fulfill one's worldly duties and responsibilities while having one's internal regard directed only toward pure bhakti. Additionally, one should engage in direct acts of devotion to the extent one is capable. For grounding in bhakti to take hold, this must be done regularly (nityadā) and not just on special occasions, such as Kṛṣṇa's appearance day, during the month of Kartika, or on weekends. If a person fulfills his duty sincerely, regarding bhakti as life's ultimate goal, then by his participation in acts of direct devotion, a taste for pure bhakti will gradually be born in him. At that stage, exclusive and uninterrupted absorption in bhakti becomes possible. 
Śrī Sūta recognizes the importance of bhakti from direct experience. He is well aware of the rare opportunity afforded by a human 
95 
55 
96 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
birth, and thus he urges us to use this unique facility specifically for bhakti. To this end, he speaks the next verse, treated in the 
following anuccheda. 
