+++
title = "010"
+++
— 
A Taste for Hearing - The First Step in Bhakti 
१० । तत्रैवान्तिमभूमिकापर्यन्तां सुगमां शैलीं वक्तुं धर्मादिकष्टनिरपेक्षेण युक्तिमात्रेण तत्प्रथमभूमिकां श्रीहरिकथारुचिमुत्पादयंस्तस्य गुणं स्मारयति ( भा० १ २ ।१५ ) - 
1 
IN THIS regard [i.e., in the matter of the immediate engagement in hearing and so on], Sūta Gosvāmi calls attention to an attribute of Bhagavan to inspire a taste for hearing the narrations of Śrī Hari (hari-katha-ruci), which is the first stage of bhakti. He does so by the logic that there is no need to undergo the trouble of taking to conventional dharma, to show just how easy bhakti is to enact even up to its culminating stage: 
यदनुध्यासिना युक्ताः कर्मग्रन्थिनिबन्धनम् । 
छिन्दन्ति कोविदास्तस्य को न कुर्यात् कथारतिम् ॥ २१ ॥ 
Those whose discernment is awakened (kovidāḥ) and who are self-controlled (yuktaḥ) slit the binding knot of karma with the sword of constant meditation on Bhagavan Hari. Who would not feel attraction for His narrations? (SB 1.2.15)1 
कोविदा विवेकिनः । युक्ताः संयतचित्ता यस्य हरेः “अनुध्या” अनुध्यानं चिन्तनमात्रम् स एवासिः खड्गस्तेन ग्रन्थिं नानादेहेष्वहङ्कारं निबध्नाति यत्तत् कर्म छिन्दन्ति । तस्यैवम्भूतस्य परमदुःखादुद्धर्तुः कथायां रतिं रुचिं को न कुर्यात् ? 
The word kovidāḥ, lit., "the wise," refers to those of awakened discernment (vivekinah). The word yuktāh, “self-controlled,” 
yad-anudhyāsinā yuktah karma-granthi-nibandhanam 
chindanti kovidas tasya ko na kuryāt kathā-ratim 
97 
46 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
refers to those whose minds are brought under the regulation of the self (samyata-cittaḥ). The pronoun yasya [i.e., yad] means "of Hari." Constant meditation (anudhya), or in other words, the exclusive contemplation (cintana-mātram) of Bhagavan Hari, is itself the sword by which the discerning cut asunder the knot of karma that binds the ego to various bodies. Who would not feel attraction for the narrations of Bhagavan, who is such that He delivers one from acute misery? 
Commentary 
CONDITIONED human beings do not have natural attraction for bhakti, but without bhakti, the self cannot attain complete fulfillment. This was Sūta Gosvāmi's conclusion. It is seen that even rich, famous, learned, and intelligent people are not fully satisfied in their lives if devoid of bhakti. Ordinarily, people think that if they had an abundance of wealth, a position of power and influence, ownership of luxury items and expensive properties, or a mutually gratifying relationship, they would be happy. On closer inspection, however, it is observed that there are many people who already have these things but who are deeply distraught and dissatisfied with their lives. Naturally one must then question: "Am I really so different that, unlike these people, I will become happy through satisfaction of egoic desire?" 
Material desire signifies a state of incompletion. With the intent of filling this gap, we become involved in karma. Karma, however, results in bondage in the form of attachment and desire, which lead to another birth. Being trapped in this cycle, we continue to suffer from one lifetime to another. We can never be sure what sort of birth we might obtain after this one. There is no guarantee of a human birth, and if we are subjected to birth in a lower species, we would remain bereft of the possibility of inquiring into truth (tattva-jijñāsā). 
Taking all this into consideration, Sūta Gosvāmī provides logical insight as to why we should take to bhakti. He reasons that meditation on Bhagavan is verily a sword to cut the bondage to 
98 
10 A Taste for Hearing - The First Step in Bhakti 
karma. Meditation here signifies all other forms of bhakti. Meditation is specifically pointed out because it involves the reorientation of attention and awareness. At present, our attention is diverted away from Bhagavan (parānmukha). This condition was analyzed earlier as being the root cause of suffering. Somehow or other, our regard has to be turned toward its original ground in Bhagavän (sammukha). When this occurs, the self's bondage is automatically cut, and one becomes fully satisfied and joyful from the depth of being. Suta's question in the final quarter of the verse is thus understood to be rhetorical. It amounts to the affirmation that those of discerning intellect certainly would feel attraction for the narrations of Bhagavan. 
To generate an interest in something, its value must be made known. This is the strategy employed by Śri Sūta. In contrast to modern advertising, however, which is based on distortions of truth, what Sūta affirms is verified by the immediate experience of those whose faculty of discernment has been awakened (kovidāḥ) and who are self-controlled (yuktāḥ). That the knot of karma is cut by bhakti in the form of meditation is authenticated by them. A few verses later (SB 1.2.21, Anuccheda 16), Sūta reiterates the same point, stating that on the immediate realization of the Supreme Self, Bhagavan, all karma is dissolved. Then in the very next verse (SB 1.2.22), he confirms that it is on this basis that the discerning (kovidāḥ) engage constantly in bhakti with supreme delight. 
In both SB 1.2.15 and SB 1.2.22, Sūta uses the word kovidah, which Śrī Jīva glosses as vivekinaḥ, meaning those whose faculty of discernment has been awakened, enabling them to discriminate between the source of true happiness and the causes of misery. Such discerning individuals engage in bhakti in the form of meditation on Bhagavan. By this, Sūta implies that others, who may or may not have awakened such capacity, should follow their example and obtain the same benefit, namely, freedom from bondage. It also suggests that those who do not take to bhakti are lacking discernment. He uses the plural (kovidāḥ) to signify that there are many who have experienced this to be true, and not just a single individual. In this manner, Sūta implores us to take to bhakti. 
99 
66 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
In his prefatory statement to this anuccheda, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi makes the point that bhakti is easy to understand and practice (sugamām sailim). By comparison, the path of karma is quite complicated and troublesome to follow. This is clearly evident if one ventures to study Pūrva-mimämsä, the school of philosophy that pertains to karma, or ritual action. 
Beginning from the next verse, Śrī Sūta delineates the various stages of bhakti starting from śraddha up to prema. 
100 
