+++
title = "012"
+++
Service in the Form of Hearing 
Purifies the Heart 
१२ । ततश्च ( भा० १।२।१७ ) - 
THEREAFTER, Sūta Gosvāmī said:1 
शृण्वतां स्वकथाः कृष्णः पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तनः । हृद्यन्तःस्थो भद्राणि विधुनोति सुहृत्सताम् ॥ २३ ॥ 
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the benefactor of His devotees, is that entity in regard to whom the acts of hearing and glorification are them- selves purifying. Being internally established within the heart of those who hear His narrations, He eradicates all inauspicious predispositions therein. (SB 1.2.17)2 
कथाद्वारा अन्तःस्थो भावनापदवीं गतः सन् हृदि अभद्राणि वासनाः ॥ 
Becoming established in a person's consciousness (antaḥstha), or in other words, in the stream of mental processes (bhāvanā- padavi), through the medium of katha, Śrī Kṛṣṇa eradicates all inauspicious predispositions (abhadrāni) in the heart (hrdi), meaning the stock of residual instincts and desires (vāsanās). 
2 
This is the second of the five verses referred to in the previous anuccheda, describing what takes place once a taste for hearing has been awakened. 
savatām sva-kathah kṛṣṇah punya-sravana-kirtanaḥ 
hrdy antahstho hy abhadrani vidhunoti suhrt satām 
107 
Commentary 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
HEARING or studying the bhakti-sastra from an authentic teacher is the key factor for progress on the path of bhakti. All conditioned beings have a stock of subliminal dispositions and desires (vāsa- nās) lurking in the unconscious mind (citta). These vasanās color one's discriminating faculty, as pointed out by Śrī Kṛṣṇa, "Embod- ied beings are deluded due to the fact that their discernment is cov- ered by ignorance" (GĪTĀ 5.15)3 On account of this filtering process, the true import of sastra cannot be understood by a person's inde- pendent efforts. If one attempts to study entirely on one's own, he is bound to misconstrue the meaning by reinterpreting it through the screen of his prior dispositions (vāsanās). When, however, one hears the śästra from an authentic teacher, Kṛṣṇa becomes present in the citta and clears it of the inauspicious vāsanās. 
Hearing and singing Krsna's names, qualities, and līlās also removes all impurities from the heart. This is recommended repeatedly in Śrimad Bhagavata. It is on this basis that Kṛṣṇa is called punya-śravana-kirtanah, meaning "He in regard to whom the acts of hearing and glorification are themselves purifying." Why does Krsna cleanse the heart of those who hear about Him? Because He is the well-wishing friend (suhrt) of the devotees (satām). To hear specifically about Kṛṣṇa, among all the various avatāras of Bhagavan, is supremely potent, and for this reason Sūta delib- erately mentions Kṛṣṇa's name in the verse. More than any other avatara of Bhagavan, it is He who enacted innumerable līlās, so that by hearing of them, people can attain love for Him, as expressed by Śrī Suka: 
3 
4 
S 
Out of compassion for the devotees, Kṛṣṇa assumed a human- like form and enacted His divine play in such a manner that upon hearing of it, one becomes exclusively devoted to Him. (SB 10.33.37)5 
ajñānenävṛtam jñanam tena muhyanti jantavaḥ 
We supply here just a few references to verses in which hearing and 
glorification of Bhagavan is emphasized: SB 1.7.7, 2.8.5, 4.7.61, 9.24.62, 10.90.49, 11.5.42, 12.3.15, 12.4.40, and 12.13.18. 
anugrahaya bhaktanām mānuṣam deham asritaḥ 
108 
12 Service in the Form of Hearing Purifies the Heart 
When the heart is thus cleansed of vāsanās, one attains fixity in 
bhakti. This is the point that Śrī Sūta will make in the next verse. 
bhajate tādṛsiḥ krīḍā yāḥ śrutvā tat paro bhavet 
109 
