+++
title = "013"
+++
Establishment in the State 
of Resolute Bhakti 
१३ । ततश्च ( भा० १।२।१८) - 
SŪTA GOSVĀMI then spoke as follows:1 
नष्टप्रायेष्वभद्रेषु नित्यं भागवतसेवया । भगवत्युत्तमश्लोके भक्तिर्भवति नैष्ठिकी ॥ २४ ॥ 
When a person's inauspicious predispositions have been almost completely destroyed by regular attendance to elevated devo- tees and by continuous hearing of Srimad Bhagavata, then reso- lute devotion unto Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is praised in choice poetry, comes into being. (SB 1.2.18)2 
नष्टप्रायेषु न तु ज्ञानमिव सम्यङ्नष्टेष्वेवेति भक्तेर्निरर्गलस्वभावत्वमुक्तम् । भागवतानां भागवतशास्त्रस्य च सेवया भक्तिरनुध्यानरूपा नैष्ठिकी सन्ततैव भवति ॥ 
The compound naṣṭa-prayeșu, "almost completely destroyed," means that bhakti appears even when a trace of material desire remains, unlike the path of jñāna, in which realization occurs only when all material desires have been completely destroyed. This demonstrates the unobstructed nature of bhakti. By ser- vice to elevated devotees and the Srimad Bhagavata, resolute devotion manifests in the form of continuous meditation. 
1 
2 
This is the third of the five verses referred to in Anuccheda 11, describing what takes place once the heart is purified of its residual dispositions. 
nasta-prayeṣv abhadresu nityam bhāgavata-sevaya 
bhagavaty uttama-sloke bhaktir bhavati naisthiki 
110 
13 Establishment in the State of Resolute Bhakti 
Commentary 
THERE are various scriptures in which Kṛṣṇa's līlās are described. Among them, Śrimad Bhagavata is paramount, because it is the most effective in purifying the heart of the listener. This is stated in the very beginning of Srimad Bhagavata (1.1.2). Being well aware of this fact, Sūta Gosvāmī specifies bhāgavata-seva - hearing, dis- cussing, and deliberating on Śrimad Bhagavata - as the means by which one's prior dispositions are wiped clean. The word bhāga- vata can also mean "a devotee of Bhagavan." Accordingly, the com- pound bhāgavata-sevaya also means "by service to elevated devo- tees," especially to one's teacher. This service is in the form of attendance to the guru's personal presence and engagement in acts meant for his pleasure. The word nityam means "regularly" and not "occasionally." 
In commenting on the words nasta-prayeṣu, "almost completely destroyed," Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī points out that bhakti becomes mani- fest even when the heart is not completely free of impurities. This shows the supremely independent nature of bhakti. Bhakti is not dependent on anything, nor can anything obstruct it. Generally, bhakti does not manifest in an offensive heart, but if it is so intended by a realized devotee, then bhakti can appear even in such a per- son. This will be described later in Anuccheda 172. In the case of jñāna-yoga, however, the immediate realization of Brahman does not occur unless one is completely free of all impurities. In the following passage, Krsna clearly specifies to Arjuna the criteria of eligibility for the realization of Brahman: 
O son of Kunti, learn from Me in brief how a person who has attained the perfection of freedom from conditional action realizes Brahman, which is the highest culmination of knowledge (jñāna). Endowed with pure intellect; controlling the mind with fortitude; forsaking the sense objects, such as pleasing sound; completely abandoning attachment and aversion; living in a solitary place and eating frugally; regulating the body, speech, and mind; being ever devoted to the yoga of meditation on Bhagavän; taking com- plete refuge in the state of nonattachment; giving up egotism, the 
111I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
force of prior dispositions, arrogance, the desire for sense plea- sure, anger, and possessiveness; and being free from the notion. of ownership and serene at heart, one becomes eligible to realize Brahman. (GĪTĀ 18.50-53)3 
What does it mean that bhakti manifests even when the heart is not completely pure? It means that although a devotee may be fully dedicated to the loving service of Bhagavan and does not have any other desire, yet there is a possibility of making a mistake because of the previous vāsanās. Thus, it is seen that sometimes even great devotees can unintentionally commit an offensive act, but in any case, they never deviate from bhakti. This is the sense of the modifier naisthiki. 
Regular service to the Bhagavata leads to complete freedom from the gunas of prakṛti. This is stated by Śrī Sūta in the next 
verse. 
3 
siddhim prapto yatha brahma tathāpnoti nibodha me samasenaiva kaunteya niṣṭhā jñānasya yā parā buddhyā visuddhaya yukto dhṛtyātmānam niyamya ca sabdadin viṣayāms tyaktvā rāga-dveṣau vyudasya ca vivikta-sevī laghv-asi yata-vāk-kaya-manasaḥ dhyana-yoga-paro nityam vairagyam samupäśritah ahankaram balam darpaṁ kamam krodham parigraham vimucya nirmamaḥ santo brahma-bhūyaya kalpate 
112 
