+++
title = "014"
+++
Absorption of the Mind in Suddha-sattva 
1 
१४ । तदैव "त्रिभुवनविभवहेतवेऽप्यकुण्ठस्मृतिः " (भा० ११।२१५३) इत्याद्युक्तरीत्या सर्व- वासनानाशात् चित्तं शुद्धसत्त्वमग्र सत् भगवत्तत्त्वसाक्षात्कारयोग्यं भवतीत्याह (भा० १।२।१९ ) - 
― 
तदा रजस्तमोभावाः कामलोभादयश्च ये । 
चेत एतैरनाविद्धं स्थितं सत्त्वे प्रसीदति ॥ २५ ॥ 
रजश्च तमश्च ये च तत्प्रभवा भावाः कामादयः । एतैरित्यन्वयः ॥ 
THEN only, [being situated in resolute devotion, the devotee's condition may be summed up as in this verse]: 
He is the foremost Vaisnava whose unabated remembrance never strays even for half a moment - not even for the sake of the opulence of the three worlds-from the lotus feet of Bhaga- vān, which are sought even by the gods for whom Ajita is their very Self. (SB 11.2.53)1 
After all residual predispositions (vāsanās) have been eradi- cated in the manner described above, the devotee's mind (citta), being immersed in the state of unalloyed being (suddha-sattva), becomes qualified for the immediate intuition of Reality as Bha- gavan. To convey this idea, Sūta Gosvāmī spoke [the fourth of the five verses]: 
tri-bhuvana-vibhava-hetave'py akuntha-smṛtir ajitātma-suradibhir vimṛgyāt na calati bhagavat-padaravindal lava-nimiṣarddham api sa vaisnavāgryah 
113 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
The heart is then no longer overpowered by the qualitative states (gunas) of perpetual distractedness (rajas) and indolence (tamas), nor by the vitiated emotions (bhāvāḥ) derived from them, such as lust, greed, and so on. Becoming established in the state of unalloyed being (sattva), consciousness becomes perfectly serene. (SB 1.2.19)2 
The heart (cetah) [i.e., the seat of consciousness] is then (tadā) no longer overpowered (anaviddham) by all these (etaiḥ) - which is to say, by the gunas of perpetual distractedness (rajas) and indolence (tamas), and (ca) by those vitiated emotions (ye bhāvāḥ), such as lust, greed, and so on, which are born of these two (tat-prabhavaḥ). This is how the sentence syntax is to be understood. 
Commentary 
IT WAS stated earlier (SB 1.2.6) that bhakti is that potency by which the self is completely and irrevocably fulfilled, and that its concomi- tant effects are knowledge along with detachment (SB 1.2.7). This is so because bhakti brings to an end the root cause of all desire, which is primordial ignorance of Bhagavan and of our true identity as conscious beings, distinct from the body-mind complex. Once this ignorance is uprooted, a devotee has no further desire for any material post, power, or possessions. 
At this stage, the devotee can no longer withdraw his mind from Bhagavan and direct it to some inert object instead. As a result, his mind cannot be overpowered by lust, greed, and other vitiated emo- tions that are products of the gunas of rajas and tamas. Such a devo- tee is established in the state of unalloyed being, or suddha-sattva, the intrinsic potency of Bhagavan. Being thus situated, the lower gunas of prakṛti cannot influence him anymore. 
2 
As a functional capacity of unalloyed being constituted of con- sciousness and bliss, bhakti pervades the mind and senses of the 
tadă rajas tamo-bhāvāḥ kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye 
ceta etair anăviddham sthitam sattve prasidati 
114 
14 Absorption of the Mind in Suddha-sattva 
devotee. When this occurs, although the devotee still acts with the same body, senses, and mind as before, the potency of Bhagavan in the form of bhakti now permeates all of these instruments. Just as the material energy naturally flows toward matter and away from Bhagavan, giving rise to material desires, feelings, and emotions, the intrinsic potency in the form of bhakti naturally flows toward Bhagavan, eliciting spiritual desires, emotions, and feelings. 
The stage of devotion being outlined in this verse does not entail radical or absolute transcendence of the gunas of prakṛti but the condition wherein the devotee is no longer subjected to their influ- ence. This is understood by use of the word anaviddham, "not over- powered," indicating that although the gunas still exist in latent form, the mind is no longer impelled by them. 
In his book Madhurya-kādambini, Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti describes five types of obstacles that are instigated by the gunas of prakrti, namely, laya, viksepa, apratipatti, kaṣāya, and rasāsvāda. These are defined as follows: 
1. Laya, or "indolence," refers to the tendency to fall asleep while engaged in the acts of hearing about Kṛṣṇa, chanting His name, and remembering Him. Because active attention is more engag- ing than passive attention, one is more likely to fall asleep while hearing than while chanting, and again more so while remem- bering than while hearing. This tendency arises from tamo- 
guna. 
2. Viksepa, or "distraction," refers to the inability to fix the mind 
while hearing, chanting, and remembering. Prior to the appear- ance of taste (ruci) for the acts of devotion, the mind constantly wanders to different topics. In this stage, the practitioner feels relieved after completing the designated quota of service, such as chanting a fixed number of mantras. The satisfaction thus ensues after the fact, from the sense of having fulfilled a duty, rather than in the moment, from the immediate intuition of Bha- gavan self-disclosed in and through the devotional act. This is an effect of rajo-guna. 
115 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
3. Apratipatti, or "irresolution," refers to the inability to commit to 
devotional practices even in the absence of laya and vikṣepa. This is experienced as the absence of enthusiasm to engage in bhakti. This condition is due to the influence of tamo-guna. 
4. Kaşaya, or "impurity," refers to the tendency toward old habits, such as anger, greed, and pride, which appear in the course of hearing, chanting, and remembering. Even in the absence of any external cause, these emotional states arise from the uncon- scious by the influence of rajo-guna. One may recall some acri- monious past incident and feel angry at someone, or one may suddenly feel an intense desire to eat a certain type of food. 5. Rasāsvāda, or "the taste for material enjoyment," refers to the nonabsorption of one's mind in hearing, chanting, and so on, due to immersion in thoughts of sensual pleasure. This also results from the influence of rajo-guna. 
On the appearance of resolute devotion (naisthiki-bhakti), the heart is no longer influenced by rajo-guna and tamo-guna, nor by their by-products in the form of lust, greed, and so on. The heart then experiences joy and is established in the state of unalloyed being (viśuddha-sattva). In this verse, the word ca, "and," refers to the vitiated emotions (bhāvas) that are derived from rajo-guna and tamo-guna. This implies that although the devotee is no longer overpowered by such emotions, the gunas of rajas and tamas persist in an inactive state. Their latent existence continues right up to the stage of bhāva, yet being inoperative, they do not create obstacles on the path of devotion. 
Scriptural lore makes reference to an alchemical gem, called touchstone (cintamani), which can turn iron into gold by its mere touch. This transmutation, however, would not alter the shape of the iron object so transformed. Correspondingly, by the touch of bhakti, the heart becomes "devotionalized" and so too the vāsanās 
3 
It should be noted that in the verse and commentary, the word bhava refers to the emotions derived from the gunas of prakṛti. Here, however, the same word refers to an advanced stage of bhakti, characterized as the first dawning of divine love, at which point the gunas of rajas and tamas disappear altogether and the self is completely permeated by viśuddha-sattva. 
116 
14 Absorption of the Mind in Suddha-sattva 
lying in it. These transmuted vāsanās, however, retain only the out- ward appearance of the vāsanās in their prior vitiated state. Hav- ing undergone transubstantiation of their essential nature, they no longer create obstacles for the devotee. As a result, even if anger arises in a devotee in regard to the pleasure or service of Bhaga- vān, that anger is also a manifestation of bhakti and not of rajo-guna. Even during deep sleep, the devotee maintains a subtle awareness of Bhagavan, because he is not influenced any longer by tamo-guna. The influence of viśuddha-sattva manifests in all three states of intellection (buddhi), namely, wakefulness, dreaming, and deep sleep. 
The next step on the path of bhakti is marked by the immediate experience of Bhagavan. Śrī Sūta speaks of this in the next verse. 
117 
