+++
title = "015"
+++
Bhakti Grants Direct Experience of Bhagavān 
१५ | भा० १।२।२०- 
ŚRI SUTA then said:1 
एवं प्रसन्नमनसो भगवद्भक्तियोगतः । भगवत्तत्त्वविज्ञानं मुक्तसङ्गस्य जायते ॥ २६ ॥ 
In this manner, to one whose consciousness is established in perfect serenity and who is thus freed of all attachment through the influence of bhakti-yoga to Bhagavan, direct experiential awareness of the "suchness" of Bhagavan is immediately self- disclosed. (SB 1.2.20)2 
एवं पूर्वोक्तप्रकारेण प्रसन्नमनसस्ततो मुक्तसङ्गस्य त्यक्तकामादिवासनस्य भक्तियोगतः पुनरपि क्रियमाणात् तस्माद् विज्ञानं साक्षात्कारो मनसि बहिर्वा भावनां विनैवानुभवो यः स जायते ॥ 
The word evam, "in this manner," refers to the above-mentioned progression that begins with awakening a taste for hearing and culminates in the stage described in this verse. It is through this progression that consciousness is established in perfect serenity (prasanna-manasaḥ), and as a consequence, the prac- titioner is freed of all attachment (mukta-sangasya), meaning 
'This is the last of the five verses referred to in Anuccheda 11, describing the final 
development after the consciousness becomes immersed in Bhagavan's intrinsic potency of unalloyed being (suddha-sattva). 
2 evam prasanna-manaso bhagavad-bhakti-yogatah bhagavat-tattva-vijñānaṁ mukta-sangasya jāyate 
118 
15 Bhakti Grants Direct Experience of Bhagavan 
that all residual predispositions (vāsanās), in the form of lust and so on, are abandoned. Then, by further engagement in bhakti, vijñāna, or in other words, direct experiential aware- ness of Bhagavan (sākṣātkāra) both internally and externally, is self-disclosed to the devotee without any mediation of mind or thought (bhāvanā). 
Commentary 
WHEN a devotee becomes established in resolute devotion (naisthiki- bhakti), then a taste (ruci) for devotional acts comes into being, which leads to the development of profound affinity (asakti) both for the acts of devotion and for Bhagavan, to whom they are directed. The devotee's mind is thus filled with delight, and he is endowed with direct experience of Bhagavan. This is so because bhakti is a unique functional capacity of Bhagavan's intrinsic being, predominated by His bliss potency (hlādini-śakti) and cognitive potency (samvit-śakti)? Knowledge also derives from the sattva- guna belonging to prakṛti-sattvät sañjāyate jñānam (GĪTĀ 14.17) - but that knowledge pertains only to phenomenality. The material sattva-guna is unable to reveal Bhagavan, since He is self-disclosed only in the state of unalloyed being, known as viśuddha-sattva. This is explicitly stated by Śrī Śiva: 
The state of unalloyed being (visuddha-sattva) is called vasudeva, because the Supreme Self is revealed therein as He is, without any covering. In this state of unalloyed being, Bhagavan Vasudeva is meditated on by me through the medium of internal awareness, since He is beyond the range of sense perception. (SB 4.3.23)* 
Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa also expresses the same idea in the follow- ing words: "Through that supreme devotion (bhakti), one fully real- izes Me in truth, what the extent of My glories are and who I am 
3 
4 
For a description of the nature and function of these potencies, see Bhagavat Sandarbha, Anuccheda 99. 
sattvam visuddham vasudeva-sabditam yad iyate tatra pumän apavṛtaḥ 
sattve ca tasmin bhagavan vasudevo hy adhoksajo me manasā vidhiyate 
119 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
in My essential nature" (GĪTĀ 18.55)5 From these two statements, it is clear that bhakti is of the nature of unalloyed being (viśuddha- sattva). The prefix vi- in vijñānam (SB 1.2.20) signifies that what is disclosed in this state is the direct experience of Bhagavān, and not just theoretical knowledge about Him. 
In this regard, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi comments that the immedi- ate intuition (sākṣātkāra) of Bhagavan occurs both internally and externally. This transpires when the devotee is freed of all mate- rial attachment (mukta-sanga), meaning that all residual predispo- sitions (vāsanās) in the form of lust and so on are then given up. When the devotee's mind is fully absorbed in Bhagavan, there is no longer any scope for material sense pleasures to attract his or her mind. In commenting on this verse, Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti explains that what is being described here is the stage of rati or bhāva, which is immediately prior to the descent of divine love (prema). The heart of the devotee who is thus established is fully imbued with the intrinsic potency of bhakti. When this occurs, the prior dispositions (vāsanās) have no scope to influence his mind. 
In the next verse, Śrī Sūta describes the concomitant effects that ensue from the immediate intuition of Bhagavan. 
$ bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yas cāsmi tattvatah tato mam tattvato jñātvā visate tad-anantaram 
120 
