+++
title = "016"
+++
Concomitant Effects of the Immediate 
Vision of Bhagavān 
१६ । तस्य च परमानन्दैकरूपत्वेन स्वतः फलरूपस्य साक्षात्कारस्यानुषङ्गिकं फलमाह ( भा० १।२।२१ ) - 
SŪTA GOSVĀMI then describes the subsidiary effects (anuşangikaphala) of this direct experiencing (sāksātkāra) of Bhagavan, which is the fruit in its own right, being exclusively of the nature of supreme bliss: 
भिद्यते हृदयग्रन्थिश्छिद्यन्ते सर्वसंशयाः । 
क्षीयन्ते चास्य कर्माणि दृष्ट एवात्मनीश्वरे ॥ २७ ॥ 
Precisely coinciding with the immediate perception of Isvara within the core of being of such a realized person, the knot of ego in the heart is pierced, all doubts are cut asunder, and the reaction to all karma is nullified. ( SB 1.2.21 ) 1 
हृदयग्रन्थिरुपाध्यहङ्कारः । सर्वसंशयाश्छिद्यन्त इति श्रवणमननादिप्रधानानामपि तस्मिन् दृष्ट एव सर्वे संशयाः समाप्यन्त इत्यर्थः । तत्र श्रवणेन तावज्ज्ञेयगतासम्भावनाश्छिद्यन्ते मननेन तद्गतविपरीतभावना साक्षात्कारेण त्वात्मयोग्यतागतासम्भावनाविपरीतभावने इति ज्ञेयम् । क्षीयन्ते तदिच्छामात्रेणैव तदाभासो न किञ्चिदेव तेष्ववशिष्यत इत्यर्थः ॥ 
I 
The knot in the heart (hṛdaya-granthi) refers to the imposition (upādhi) of the material ego (ahankāra). That all doubts are cut 
bhidyate hṛdaya-granthis chidyante sarva-samsayah 
kşiyante casya karmani drsta evätmaniśvare 
121I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
asunder means that even the doubts of those who are primarily engaged in the sadhana that pertains to the path of jñāna, such as hearing (śravana) and deliberating on scriptural truth (manana), come to an end only upon the immediate apperception of Iśvara. Among these different sadhanas, the engagement in hearing scriptural truth (śravana) dispels the doubt of impossibility (asambhāvanā) regarding the Truth under investigation. By deliberation (manana), doubts that lead to contrary opinions (viparita-bhāvanā) about the Truth to be known are removed. Finally, by direct seeing (sākṣātkāra), the doubts of impossibility (asambhavana) and of contrary thinking (viparita-bhāvanā) regarding one's own competence to realize the Truth are eradicated. That the reaction to all karma is nullified means that merely by Bhagavan's will, not even a trace of karma remains in those blessed with such direct visioning? 
Commentary 
IN THIS verse, Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī describes three concomitant effects ensuing from the direct vision (sākṣātkāra) of Bhagavān mentioned in the previous verse: 
2 
1. The knot in the heart is pierced. The atma and the material body are two distinct entities. They are not connected through any physical relation of contact (samyoga) or inherence (samavāya). Yet in the conditioned state, they function as one unit. This happens through the identification of the self with the material ego (ahankara). This identification, or superimposition, is called hrdaya-granthi, "the knot in the heart," or avidya-granthi, "the knot of ignorance," referring to the knot that binds the cit (the conscious self) to jada (the inert material body). The material ego is also called an upadhi, or that which is in proximity 
Many editions of Bhakti Sandarbha as well as Krama-sandarbha have a variant reading in which the negative particle na is missing from the last line of Jiva Gosvāmi's commentary. In that case, the meaning would be just the opposite, i.e., "It is only by the will of Bhagavan that a trace of karma still remains in them." This point is discussed further in the commentary. 
122 
16 Concomitant Effects of the Immediate Vision of Bhagavan 
(upa) and into which the self is invested (adhi). The root cause of this knot is the beginningless ignorance of Bhagavan. Upon the immediate realization (sākṣātkāra) of Bhagavan, the knot in the heart disappears of its own accord. To indicate that this occurs effortlessly for a devotee, even without intending it, Śrī Suta has used the impersonal passive voice (karma kartari)3 — "the knot is pierced [by itself]," instead of "bhakti cuts the knot." 2. All doubts are cut asunder. For the practitioner, doubts arise in regard to the ultimate object of attainment, i.e., Bhagavan, and about one's own competence to realize the truth outlined by the path. Doubt implies more than one possibility about an object or the process of its attainment. When we are unable to ascertain which of several possibilities is true and which are false, we become doubtful. Once the devotee is established in the immediate perception of Bhagavan, doubt is no longer possible. 3. All karma is nullified. The word karma in this verse refers to the 
results of karma, of which there are three categories: 
a) Prarabdha-karma consists of actions performed in past 
lives that are yielding their results in the present life. b) Sañcita-karma refers to the totality of all karma accu- 
mulated over past lives that will fructify in future lives. 
c) Kriyamāṇa-karma refers to the karma that is being 
created in the present life. 
All these phases of karma are nullified for a devotee who is established in the immediate vision of Bhagavan. Such a devotee is thus known as jīvan-mukta, or "liberated while living." A person remains under the law of karma as long as he does not direct his regard toward the tattva, either as Brahman, Paramātmā, or Bhagavan. This is the limit of karma, beyond which it has no further influence. 
A doubt may be raised in this regard: If a devotee becomes free of all karma, including prärabdha, which is the very basis of his 
1 
kriyamanam tu yat karma svayam siddham pratiyate 
atyanta-sukaratvena karma-karteti tad viduḥ 
"When an action, due to the excessive ease with which it occurs, appears to unfold of its own accord [without the mediation of an agent], it is called karma-karta" (HNV 4.21). 
123 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
physical body, then should not his body drop dead immediately? The body cannot function if its foundation is uprooted. Śri Jiva Gosvāmi addresses this question by explaining that by the will of Bhagavan, a semblance (ābhāsa) of karma is maintained for the devotee so that he can continue to live. Bhagavan arranges this just to enable such devotees to exist in the world for the propagation of bhakti. Otherwise, there would be no living exemplars of perfected devotion. 
An instance of this is seen in the life of the devotee Prahlada. He was granted direct vision (darśana) of Bhagavan Narasimha and even prayed to be taken into the association of His devotees, upanaya māṁ nija-bhrtya-pārśvam (SB 7.9.24). But Bhagavan did not grant His wish immediately. He requested Prahlada to stay back and act as an example to other devotees (SB 7.10.21). 
The above explanation is based on the alternative reading of Jiva Gosvāmi's comment to SB 1.2.21, in which the negative particle na is omitted, as pointed out already in the footnote that relates to this point. If, however, we accept the reading found in this edition, i.e., with inclusion of na, then the reasoning would be that although the liberated devotee's karma comes to an end, Bhagavan keeps such a devotee alive by His mere will, simply to teach others. Both explanations amount to the same thing, the only difference being that in the former case, Bhagavan maintains a semblance of the devotee's karma, which automatically preserves the body's functioning, whereas in the latter case, He directly wills that the devotee's life is sustained in spite of the total eradication of karma. 
The word atmani, "in the self" or "in the heart," specifies the location wherein the immediate seeing of Bhagavan comes into being. Alternatively, it can be taken as a modifier of iśvare, i.e., Brahman, Paramātmā, or Bhagavan. The word ātmā can refer to all three manifestations of the tattva. If the first meaning is taken, the phrase in question would be rendered as "only upon the immediate apperception of Isvara within one's own self." If the second meaning is taken instead, the phrase would be read as, "only upon the immediate apperception of Isvara as the ātmā [i.e., as Brahman, Paramātmā, or Bhagavan]." Understood in the latter 
124 
16 Concomitant Effects of the Immediate Vision of Bhagavan 
sense, the verse would be applicable to all three categories of realized practitioners, namely, the jñānīs, yogis, and bhaktas. When Isvara is immediately self-disclosed to any of them in the aspect that accords with their respective view, the knot of ego is cut, all doubts are dissipated, and the reactions to karma are destroyed. This verifies once again that all paths are dependent on bhakti to deliver their intended results. 
In the next verse, Śrī Sūta confirms the efficacy of this process by referring to the experience of past transcendentalists. 
125 
