+++
title = "017"
+++
Enlightened Sages Continuously Engage in Bhakti 
१७ । अत्र प्रकरणार्थे सदाचारं दर्शयन्नुपसंहरति ( भा० १।२।२२) - 
SŪTA GOSVĀMĪ concludes this section by pointing out the conduct of enlightened devotees in connection with the topic under discussion: 
अतो वै कवयो नित्यं भक्तिं परमया मुदा । 
वासुदेवे भगवति कुर्वन्त्यात्मप्रसादनीम् ॥ २८ ॥ 
For this reason, indeed, the enlightened sages, out of supreme delight, continuously engage in bhakti to Bhagavan Vasudeva, which is utterly fulfilling to the self. (SB 1.2.22)1 
आत्मप्रसादनीं मनसः शोधनीम् । न केवलमेतावद्गुणत्वं तस्याः किं च परमया मुदेति कर्मानुष्ठानवन्न साधनकाले साध्यकाले वा भक्त्यनुष्ठानं दुःखरूपं प्रत्युत सुखरूपमेवेत्यर्थः । अत एव नित्यं साधकदशायां सिद्धदशायां चैव तावत् कुर्वन्तीत्युक्तम् ॥ श्रीसूतः ॥ 
1 
The compound ātma-prasādanīm, "which is utterly fulfilling to the self” [modifying bhakti], means that devotion purifies the total quantum of internal awareness (manasaḥ śodhanim). This, however, is not the only virtue of bhakti. In addition, it is paramaya muda, meaning that it is performed "with supreme delight." This signifies that unlike karma, the enactment 
ato vai kavayo nityam bhaktim paramaya muda vasudeve bhagavati kurvanty atma-prasadanim 
126 
17 Enlightened Sages Continuously Engage in Bhakti 
of bhakti is not troublesome either during the stage of practice or in the stage of perfection; rather it is always pleasurable. This is why it is said that enlightened sages "continuously" (nityam) engage in bhakti, meaning both in the stage of practice and that of perfection. 
Commentary 
IN THE FIRST chapter of Srimad Bhagavata, Saunaka raised six questions. The second of these was a request to specify the essential engagement recommended as the culmination of all scriptures, by which the self is completely fulfilled (SB 1.1.11). In other words, Saunaka was asking what is the abhidheya, or the ultimate means of attainment, advocated by all the different scriptures. In response, Sūta Gosvāmi replied that bhakti alone is the supreme abhidheya propounded in all the śastras, since only bhakti can bestow complete, unending fulfillment (SB 1.2.6-8). On this basis, Sūta recommended that bhakti is to be taken up as the supreme duty of all humanity (SB 1.2.13-15). 
Having determined bhakti as the abhidheya, Śrī Sūta then spoke five verses (SB 1.2.16-20) delineating the progression of bhakti from its beginning in śraddha up to its culmination in divine love, which establishes the devotee in the immediate vision of Bhagavan. Then in SB 1.2.21 (Anuccheda 16), he described three concomitant effects of bhakti. Although a pure devotee has no desire for anything other than to please Bhagavan through loving service, yet it is the nature of bhakti to bestow such benefits upon the devotee. 
These verses have been summarized by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, who derived from their analysis the following nine stages of bhakti: 
In the beginning, there is the onset of faith, śraddha (1), which leads to the association with devotees, sadhu-sariga (2). By their influence, a person is drawn to engage in devotional practices, bhajana-kriyā (3). This then removes unwanted desires and impressions from the practitioner's heart, anartha-nivṛtti (4), at which point one becomes firmly situated in resolute devotion, 
127 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
nistha (5). From this, a taste for bhakti comes into being, ruci (6), which leads to a profound affinity both for bhakti and its object, Bhagavan, asakti (7). From such affinity, the permanent transcendental emotion is born, bhāva (8), which culminates in the state of divine love, prema (9). This is the sequence of love's manifestation in the devotional practitioner. (BRS 1.4.15-16)2 
On the basis of the same Bhāgavata verses under discussion, Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti offers an elaborated analysis of the entire progression, breaking it down into fourteen steps, as follows: 
In the above series of verses (SB 1.2.16-21), there are fourteen steps: (1) the initial grace of a devotee, (2) service to a highly realized devotee, (3) the awakening of faith, (4) taking shelter of a guru, (5) dawning of the inclination to participate in devotional practices, (6) formal engagement in bhakti, (7) removal of unwanted desires from the heart, (8) fixity in bhakti, (9) relish, (10) affinity, (11) permanent transcendental emotion, (12) divine love, (13) the direct vision of Bhagavan, and (14) the immediate experience of His most endearing nature. (Sarartha-darśinī 1.2.21) 
In philosophical writing, after positing a theory or establishing a conclusion, it is common practice to offer an appropriate illustration of the matter under discussion. In keeping with this strategy, Sūta Gosvāmi concludes his elaboration of the progression of bhakti by citing the example of the kavis. The word kavi (lit., “a poet") refers here to a person who is both erudite and realized in scripture. To be an accomplished poet in Sanskrit, one has to be highly learned in the various schools of Indian thought. The fact that bhakti is completely fulfilling to the self is thus confirmed by the direct experience of such enlightened mystical poets. 
2 adau śraddha tataḥ sadhu-sango'tha bhajana-kriya tato'nartha-nivṛttiḥ syat tato nistha rucis tataḥ tathāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premabhyudañcati sadhakanām ayam premnaḥ prädurbhavaḥ bhavet kramaḥ satām kṛpā mahat-seva śraddha guru-pādāśrayaḥ 
bhajaneşu spṛha bhaktir anarthapagamas tataḥ nistha rucir athāsakti ratiḥ prematha darsanam harer madhuryanubhava ity arthah syuś caturdase 
128 
17 Enlightened Sages Continuously Engage in Bhakti 
Because bhakti is related to the atmā, our innermost being, it is therefore naturally pleasing to execute. In spite of this, however, as long as faith has not taken hold in the ātmā in regard to this path, one will find it to be somewhat troublesome. When established in faith, the journey becomes easy and delightful, because one naturally takes pleasure in doing whatever one is firmly convinced about. When, however, faith is absent, one may find bhakti to be a drudgery. 
In this regard, the argument may be raised that if all endeavors are made pleasurable on the basis of personal conviction, then all paths should be a source of delight for their respective followers. Why is it then said of bhakti in particular that it is delightful both during practice as well as in the perfected state? The reply is that on other paths, such as karma and jñāna, even if one has faith, he will have to struggle, because these disciplines are not intrinsic to the self. Consequently, one should endeavor only for bhakti. 
The word nityam ("perpetually") in this verse implies that bhakti does not come to an end when a devotee attains perfection, as is the case with other paths, such as karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, and aṣṭānga-yoga. Bhakti is the dharma, or constitutional function, of the self, the ātmā. Since the atma is eternal, its dharma is also eternal. This is the conclusion of Sūta Gosvāmi. 
In the course of his discussion, Suta Gosvāmī used various epithets for Bhagavan, such as Vasudeva, Adhokṣaja, Visvaksena, Hari, Satvatām Pati, Krsna, Uttamaśloka, and Iśvara. All these should be understood as referring primarily to Visnu or Kṛṣṇa. This is due to the fact that Krsna is the primary intent of all the speakers and hearers throughout Bhāgavata Purāṇa, as established in Kṛṣṇa Sandarbha through an elaborate analysis of the principal dialogues. This is certainly true in the case of Sūta Gosvāmi, who praised Saunaka because his six questions were all related to Kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa-sampraśnaḥ (SB 1.2.5). 
4 
munayaḥ sadhu prsto ham bhavadbhir loka-mangalam yat-kṛtaḥ kṛṣṇa-sampraśno yenātmā suprasīdati 
129 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
In the next anuccheda, Jīva Gosvāmī introduces a new section to examine the question "What about performing devotion to other devas, such as Siva and Brahmā?" 
130 
