+++
title = "021"
+++
The Import of All Scriptures and Practices Is in Vasudeva Alone 
२१ । ततो वासुदेव एव भजनीय इत्युक्तम् । सर्वशास्त्रतात्पर्यं च तत्रैवेत्याह द्वाभ्याम् ( भा० १।२।२८-२९ ) - 
IT IS THUS proclaimed that only Bhagavan Vasudeva' is to be worshiped. The fact that the import of all scriptures culminates in this conclusion alone is expressed by Śri Sūta in the following 
two verses: 
I 
2 
वासुदेवपरा वेदा वासुदेवपरा मखाः । 
वासुदेवपरा योगा वासुदेवपराः क्रियाः ॥ ३४ ॥ 
वासुदेवपरं ज्ञानं वासुदेवपरं तपः । 
वासुदेवपरो धर्मो वासुदेवपरा गतिः ॥ ३५ ॥ 
The Vedas are exclusively intent upon Bhagavan Vasudeva. Sacrificial rites are for the sake of Vasudeva. All yoga aims at Väsudeva. All ritual action is meant to attain Vasudeva. The jñānaśāstras have as their goal the immediate intuition of Vasudeva. Asceticism is undertaken to attain Vasudeva. Religious duties have their end in Vasudeva, and the ultimate destination is Vasudeva. (SB 1.2.28-29)2 
Vasudeva is another name for Krsna, meaning "the son of Vasudeva." vasudeva-para veda vasudeva-para makhāḥ 
vasudeva-para yoga väsudeva-parāḥ kriyaḥ 
vasudeva-paraṁ jñānam vasudeva-param tapah 
vasudeva-paro dharmo vasudeva-para gatiḥ 
147 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
टीका च - “वासुदेवः परस्तात्पर्यगोचरो येषां ते । ननु वेदा मखपरा दृश्यन्ते ? इत्याशङ्क्य तेऽपि तदाराधनार्थत्वात् तत्परा एवेत्युक्तम् । योगा योगशास्त्राणि । तेषामप्यासनप्राणायामादिक्रियापरत्वमाशङ्क्य तासामपि तत्प्राप्त्युपायत्वात् तत्परत्वमुक्तम् । 
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments as follows on these two verses: "The clause väsudeva-para vedaḥ means that the Vedas are those texts whose import (tātparya) is self-disclosed (gocarah) as Vasudeva. But is it not observed that the Vedas are concerned only with sacrificial rites? Anticipating this objection, Suta proclaimed that even sacrificial rites are exclusively focused on Vasudeva (tatparâ eva), because their sole intent is to worship Him. The word yogāḥ in the verse refers to the scriptures that delineate the yoga system. If it is argued that these texts are concerned only with the various limbs of yoga, such as asana and prāṇāyāma [and not with Vasudeva], it is answered that because these practices are ultimately means to attain Vasudeva, the yoga-sastras as well are concerned only with Him (tat-parā). 
ज्ञानं ज्ञानशास्त्रम् । ननु तज्ज्ञानपरमेवेत्याशङ्क्य ज्ञानस्यापि तत्परत्वमुक्तम् । तपोऽत्र ज्ञानम् । धर्मो धर्मशास्त्रं दानव्रतादिविषयम् । ननु तत्स्वर्गादिपरमित्याशङ्क्य तस्यापि तदधीनत्वात् तत्परत्वम् । गम्यत इति गतिः स्वर्गादिफलम् । सापि तदानन्दांशप्रकाशरूपत्वात् तत्परैवेत्युक्तम् । 
"The word jñānam refers to the scriptures that delineate the path of jñāna, or the immediate intuition of the self's identity with Brahman. Anticipating the objection that these scriptures are concerned only with such jñāna, Sūta declared that even the immediate intuition of Brahman (jñāna) is in essence only the intuition of Him (tat-paratvam). In the verse, the word tapas, lit., 'asceticism,' means 'the cultivation of jñāna' [i.e., jñānasādhana as distinguished from jñāna as the immediate intuition of Brahman just referred to]. 
"The word dharma refers to the scriptures that propound religious rituals and pious actions, such as offering charity and observing vows. In response to the contention that these scriptures are directed only toward the attainment of heaven, it is said that because heaven rests upon Vasudeva [as the source 
148 
21 The Import of All Scriptures and Practices Is in Vasudeva Alone 
and ground of its existence], the dharma-sastras too are concerned only with Him. Etymologically, the word gatiḥ means 'that which is to be gone to or obtained' (gamyata), referring to the aspired for results of dharma, such as heaven. Even this destination [gati, i.e., svarga], being a manifestation of a portion of the bliss of Vasudeva, is said to have Him alone as its ultimate object (tat-pară eva). 
यद्वा वेदा इत्यनेनैव तन्मूलत्वात् सर्वाण्यपि वासुदेवपराणीत्युक्तम् । ननु वेदानां तेषां मखयोगक्रियादिनानार्थपरत्वान् न तदेकपरत्वमित्याशङ्क्य मखादीनामपि तत्परत्वमुक्तमिति द्रष्टव्यम्" इत्येषा । 
"An alternate explanation of the verse is that because the Vedas are rooted in and derived from Vasudeva, all the processes mentioned in the verse, being prescribed by the Vedas, are also said to aim at Him. In this regard, it may be objected that since the Vedas are concerned with numerous subjects, such as sacrificial rites, yoga, and ritual action, they cannot have Väsudeva as their one and only aim. In reply to this objection, it is to be acknowledged that these sacrificial rites and other practices are also determined to have Him as their ultimate object (tat-paratvam)." [Here ends Śrīdhara Svāmi's comment.] 
अत्र योगादीनां कथञ्चिद् भक्तिसचिवत्वेनैव तत्परत्वं मुख्यं द्रष्टव्यम् । वेदाश्च कर्मकाण्डपरा एव ज्ञेयाः केषाञ्चित् साक्षाद्भक्तिपरत्वमपि दृश्यत इति (श्वे० ६ १२३) - 
It should be noted here that it is only because the practices mentioned, such as yoga, are somewhat supportive of bhakti that their primary aim is said to culminate in Kṛṣṇa. The Vedas should be understood to be concerned only with the path of ritual action (karma-kāṇḍa), but it is also observed that some are directly intent on bhakti, as is evident from the following verse: 
यस्य देवे परा भक्तिर्यथा देवे तथा गुरौ । 
तस्यैते कथिता ह्यर्थाः प्रकाशन्ते महात्मनः ॥ ३६ ॥ इत्यादेः ॥ 
149 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
The imports of the teachings described in this Upanisad are revealed only to that elevated soul in whom transcendental devotion for Bhagavan is present and who feels the same quality of devotion for his guru as felt for Bhagavan. (śu 6.23)3 
Commentary 
IN THE TWO VERSES cited in this anuccheda (SB 1.2.28-29), Śrī Sūta answers Śaunaka's question (raised in SB 1.1.11) regarding the essence of all śästra. Earlier Śrī Sūta made the point that it is specifically Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is to be worshiped, because the ultimate good (śreyamsi) proceeds from Him alone, the very embodiment of unalloyed being (SB 1.2.23). He then affirmed this by pointing out that it is on this account that the mumuksus, or those who aspire for the ultimate good in the form of mukti, worship only Him. Now in the above two verses, Sūta confirms that Kṛṣṇa is the one and only entity to be worshiped because the import of all sastras culminates in Him alone. The same idea is expressed in Katha Upanisad and Skanda Purana: 
I shall speak to you in brief of that Absolute Ground and Source [padam, i.e., Śrī Kṛṣṇa], which all the Vedas propound, which all austerities affirm, and aspiring for which, the discriminating embrace the life of formal studentship (brahmacarya). That Reality is signified by, and identical with, the self-disclosed vibration Om. (Katha Upanisad 1.2.15)* 
Accordingly, in Bhagavad Gita, Kṛṣṇa indirectly informs Arjuna that the sonic vibration Om is nondifferent from Him: 
4 
Repeating the one imperishable syllable, "Om," which is Brahman in the form of sound, and continuously remembering Me - one 
yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau 
tasyaite kathitä hy arthaḥ prakāśante mahātmanah 
sarve veda yat padam amananti tapāmsi sarvāni ca yad vadanti 
yad-icchanto brahmacaryam caranti tat te padam sangrahena bravimy om ity etat 
150 
21 The Import of All Scriptures and Practices Is in Vasudeva Alone 
who departs thus while giving up the body reaches the supreme destination. (GĪTĀ 8.13)5 
The same point that Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is the entity to be worshiped is stated in the following verse: 
In the Vedas, Rāmāyaṇa, the Purāņas, and Mahabharata, Bhagavan Hari alone is glorified everywhere - in the beginning, middle, and end. (Skanda Purāņa 4.95.12)6 
The Veda consists primarily of two divisions, karma-kānda (concerning ritual action) and jñāna-kanda (concerning identity consciousness). The adherents of the first division, the Mīmāmsakas, claim that the essential message of the Veda lies in the fulfillment of dharma or karma, which primarily entails ritual or sacramental action (yajna or makha). In reply to this view, Śrī Sūta asserts that the true aim of yajña can be that alone which is its own source, namely, Vasudeva (Kṛṣṇa). That He is both the origin and end of the universal principle of yajña, is confirmed by His own admission: 
I alone am the one for whom all yajñas are intended and the one who bestows their results. But they [the devotees of other devas] do not know Me in truth and, therefore, they must fall from the realm of heaven. (GĪTĀ 9.24)" 
What Kṛṣṇa intends to say here is that even when the Veda prescribes the pouring of oblations into the sacrificial fire for devas such as Agni or Indra, this procedure is ultimately meant only for Him, who as Paramātmā, is the indwelling Self of the devas as well as the source and destination of all yajñas. 
The next point made by Śrī Sūta is that Vasudeva is the aim of yoga. Śrīdhara Svāmī comments here that the word yoga signifies the literature that expounds the yoga system. This could 
$ om ity ekakṣaram brahma vyāharan mām anusmaran 
yaḥ prayāti tyajan deham sa yati paramam gatim 
6 vede rāmāyaṇe caiva purane bharate tathā 
adav ante ca madhye ca hariḥ sarvatra giyate 
? aham hi sarva-yajñānāṁ bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca na tu mām abhijānanti tattvenātas cyavanti te 
151I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
refer either to the Upanisads that deal specifically with the various aspects of yoga (such as Yoga-cuḍāmani Upanisad) or to the yoga texts that were composed in pursuance of those Upanisads. The ultimate purpose of all such literature is to redirect awareness toward Paramātmā or Kṛṣṇa, the Master of Yoga (vogeśvara, GĪTĀ 18.78). In consonance with this understanding, Kṛṣṇa declares that those who worship Him with love are the best of all yogis (GĪTĀ 6.47). 
Next in the verse, we come to the word kriya (lit., "action"), which Śrīdhara Svāmī glosses as the yogic practices of posture (āsana), regulation of the vital force (prāṇāyāma), and so on. The purpose of all these actions is to create a stable physical foundation and an integrated internal environment that conduces to meditation and transcognitive awareness of Bhagavan (i.e., samadhi). In broader terms, the word kriyā generally refers to the religious or ritual actions prescribed in the Smrtis, the books that outline the codes of conduct for the adherents of varṇāśrama. The purpose of such ritual action is also to please Kṛṣṇa, as stated in Visnu Purana: 
The Supreme Being, Visņu, is worshiped by a human being through adherence to the principles of varnasrama-dharma. There is no other path that leads to His satisfaction [i.e., that leads to bhakti, which is the true cause of His satisfaction]. (VP 3.8.9) 
On this basis, Kṛṣṇa advises everyone to offer all their actions (kriyās) to Him: 
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in sacrifice, whatever you donate in charity, and whatever austerity you perform, O son of Kunti, do all of that as an offering unto Me. (GĪTĀ 9.27)9 
The next point made in the verse is that Kṛṣṇa is the aim of jñāna, which Śrīdhara Svāmi glosses as the jñana-śāstras. The 
9 
varṇāśramācāravata purusena paraḥ pumân 
vişnur ärādhyate pantha nanyat tat-tosa-kāraṇam 
yat karoşi yad aśnāsi yaj juhosi dadasi yat 
yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kuruşva mad-arpanam 
152 
21 The Import of All Scriptures and Practices Is in Vasudeva Alone 
scriptures that delineate the path of jñāna are generally understood to have as their goal the immediate intuition of Brahman, but because Krsna is the basis of Brahman (brahmano hi pratisthāham, GĪTĀ 14.27), this amounts to the immediate intuition of Him alone. The purpose of the jñāna-kända portion of the Veda is thus fulfilled in the direct realization of Śrī Kṛṣṇna, as He Himself declares: "By all the Vedas, I alone am to be known" (vedaiś ca sarvair aham eva vedyaḥ, GĪTĀ 15.15). 
In this connection, Śrīdhara Svāmi glosses the word tapas, lit., "asceticism," as jñāna, meaning "the cultivation of knowledge" (jñāna-sādhana), or the practices that lead to refined philosophical or intellectual illumination. Knowledge culminates in the awareness of Krsna, as He makes evident in the following two 
verses: 
One who is endowed with learning that culminates in immediate knowing, who is established in the direct intuition of the self, and who is not reliant on empirical means of knowing, realizes this world of duality as mere appearance and surrenders both knowledge and its cultivation unto Me. (SB 11.19.1) 10 
And: 
After many births, the person endowed with the wisdom that "Vasudeva is everything" surrenders unto Me. Such a great person is extremely rare. (GĪTĀ 7.19)" 
Next to be considered in the verse is the word dharma. According to Śrīdhara Svāmi, the word dharma refers to the scriptures that treat the subject of dharma, the religious and moral duties that are incumbent on each individual within a societal framework. In this regard, the dharma-sastras prescribe pious acts, such as offering charity, observing vows, and fasting, all of which are directed toward the attainment of heaven. Svämipada reasons 
10 yo vidyāśruta-sampanna ātmavän nänumānikaḥ 
11 
māyā-matram idam jñātvā jñānam ca mayi sannyaset 
"1 bahūnām janmanām ante jñānavān mam prapadyate 
väsudevaḥ sarvam iti sa mahātmā sudurlabhaḥ 
153 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
that because heaven is dependent on Bhagavan Vasudeva (tadadhīnatvāt), dharma that aims at heaven ultimately aims only at Him. Because the adherents of this path honor the injunctions of the dharma-śāstra, Kṛṣṇa awards them the objects for which they aspire. Alternatively, the word dharma could be taken to mean the parama-dharma in the form of pure devotional service. In that case, it goes without saying that such dharma is intent exclusively upon Vasudeva. 
Lastly, we come to the word gati (lit., "motion, gait, or moving"), which here means "destination" or "goal." There is a traditional saying in Sanskrit that all verbal roots that convey the meaning "to go or to move" also connote the idea of "attaining a goal" or "knowing" (sarve gaty arthaḥ präpty arthā jñānārthaś ca). Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate goal described in the Vedas. Śrīdhara Svāmī comments that those who strive for the happiness of heaven by following dharma or by engaging in pious deeds also indirectly aim at Kṛṣṇa and no one else. This is so because heavenly happiness is a manifestation of but a portion of His bliss. Kṛṣṇa confirms that whatever is splendorous in this world is manifested from a portion of His potency (GĪTĀ 10.41). In the Bṛhad-aranyaka Upanisad, it is said: "All other living beings subsist on a particle of His bliss alone" (BAU 4.3.32).2 
12 
In concluding this anuccheda, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi comments that it is only because yoga, jñāna, and the other disciplines mentioned in these two verses are somewhat supportive of bhakti that they are said to aim at Kṛṣṇa. The Vedas in general are primarily concerned with prescriptions for the performance of yajña directed toward material fruits. The sections that treat of this topic relate to Kṛṣṇa only indirectly. There are other portions, however, that pertain directly to Him, being explicit expositions of Bhagavan and His bhakti. 
In this manner, it is shown that the purpose of all sastra is only to disclose Bhagavan. Not only the Vedas, Puranas, and Itihāsas, but even the texts that deal with medical science, music, art, dance, martial arts, architecture, and so on, also have as their intended aim the worship of Bhagavan alone. In other words, the Veda and all 
12 etasyaivānandasyānyani bhūtāni mātrām upajīvanti 
154 
21 The Import of All Scriptures and Practices Is in Vasudeva Alone 
the various branches of knowledge derived thereof have only one goal, and that is the worship of Vasudeva. 
In the next verse, Śrī Sūta clarifies that the entity who is known as the creator, the support, and the resting place of the cosmos after its dissolution is the same Vasudeva. 
155 
