+++
title = "022"
+++
The Consistent Reconciliation of All Scriptures Is in Vasudeva 
२२ । तदेवं तद्भजनस्यैवाभिधेयत्वं दर्शयित्वा पूर्वोक्तं सर्वशास्त्रसमन्वयमेव स्थापयति ( भा० ११२।३० ) - 
IN THIS MANNER, having demonstrated that the abhidheya, or "the prescribed means to realize the Absolute," is nothing other than the devotional turning of regard in bhajana to Bhagavān, Sūta Gosvāmi now establishes that Vasudeva, mentioned in the two previous verses, is indeed the synthesis (samanvaya), or the consistent reconciliation, of all scriptures: 
1 
स एवेदं ससर्जाग्रे भगवानात्ममायया । 
सदसद्रूपया चासौ गुणमय्यागुणो विभुः ॥ ३७ ॥ इत्यादि । 
He, this very same Bhagavan [Vasudeva], who is beyond the material gunas and all-pervading (vibhu), evolved this cosmos in the beginning through His own extrinsic potency (māyā), which is constituted of the three gunas and whose nature is ingrained in the interplay of cause and effect. (SB 1.2.30)' 
टीका च - " ननु जगत्सर्गप्रवेशनियमनादिलीलायुक्ते वस्तुनि सर्वशास्त्रसमन्वयो दृश्यते कथं वासुदेवपरत्वं सर्वस्य ? तत्राह स एव' इति चतुर्भिः” इत्येषा । 
Śrīdhara Svāmī comments as follows on this verse: "The question may be raised that since the consistent reconciliation 
sa evedam sasarjägre bhagavan ätma-māyayā 
sad-asad-rupaya casau gunamayyaguno vibhuh 
156 
22 The Consistent Reconciliation of All Scriptures Is in Vasudeva 
(samanvaya) of all scriptures is evidenced in an ontological existent (vastu) self-endowed with the cosmic functions (līlā) of evolving (sarga), entering (praveśa), and regulating (niyamana) the world, how can Vasudeva be the ultimate aim of all scriptures? To answer this question, Sūta speaks four verses, beginning with this one." [Here ends Śrīdhara Svāmi's comment.] 
इदं महदादिविरिञ्चिपर्यन्तम् । एवं प्रवेशादिकाप्युत्तरश्लोकेषु द्रष्टव्या ॥ श्रीसूतः श्रीशौनकम् ॥ 
In the verse, the pronoun idam, "this [cosmos]" signifies everything beginning from mahat ("cosmic intellect"), the first evolute of primordial nature, up to Brahma, the highest being within the material cosmos. [In this verse, Bhagavan's enactment of world evolution (jagat-sarga) is the subject being portrayed.] In corresponding manner, Bhagavan's other cosmic functions of entering and regulating the world are depicted in the subsequent verses. 
Commentary 
ACCORDING to Taittiriya Upanisad, Brahman is the source, the support, and the end of all beings: 
You should aspire to realize that from which all these beings are born, by which they subsist after birth, toward which they proceed, and into which they enter at the time of dissolution. That is Brahman. (TU 3.1)2 
Indeed, the Vedanta-sutra, which is meant to harmonize all the Upanisads, begins by defining the Supreme Truth, Brahman, as that from which the evolution, sustenance, and dissolution of all things proceed (janmady asya). It is significant, therefore, that the Bhāgavata, which is said to be the natural commentary on Vedanta, 
2 
yato va imani bhūtāni jayante. yena jätäni jīvanti. yat prayanty abhisamvisanti. tad vijijñāsasva tad brahmeti. 
157 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
also begins with these very words. Rather than designating Bhagavan by any of His names as the intended aim of the Bhāgavata, the text declares "Let us meditate on that Supreme Truth, from whom this cosmos emanates, in whom it exists, and into whom it is again dissolved." Now Suta clearly identifies the entity (vastu) who is characterized in these terms as none other than Vasudeva. 
In this regard, it is questioned how Vasudeva, who after all was a historical figure who appeared within the world at a certain time and later disappeared from view, could be the ultimate end of all the Vedas, the sacrificial rites, and other religious undertakings. To dispel this doubt, Śrī Sūta speaks four verses beginning with the one cited here. There is no contradiction between the Upanisadic statement cited above and the words of Suta Gosvāmī, because the Brahman of the Upanisads is the very same nondual Absolute designated here as Bhagavan or Vasudeva. This point was already discussed earlier at the end of Anuccheda 6. 
In Suta's statement, the emphatic particle eva, "only or specifically," qualifies the pronoun sah, "He," which relates back to its antecedent, Vasudeva, from the previous two verses. This particle is used here to highlight the fact that no other entity, such as Siva or Brahma, can be the source and ground of cosmic evolution, since these devas also originate from Him: "I am verily the origin of all the devas" (GĪTĀ 10.2)3 On this consideration, it is concluded that only Vasudeva, Kṛṣṇa, is the Truth to be worshiped by all beings. 
This verse can also provide a clue for researchers on the cuttingedge of cosmological studies as to the nature of the ultimate cause underlying the cosmos. Although numerous theories of creation have been posited by modern science, none of them are conclusive. Moreover, even if a particular theory is accepted, it still leaves unanswered questions regarding the telos of creation. The fact that matter (i.e., energy bound in quantized wave-packets) evolves and the sequence of its unfolding beginning from the Big Bang are known with some degree of accuracy. It must be questioned, however, what is the source of this primordial matter, and how 
3 
na me viduḥ sura-ganah prabhavam na maharṣayaḥ aham adir hi devānam maharṣinam ca sarvaśaḥ 
158 
22 The Consistent Reconciliation of All Scriptures Is in Vasudeva 
can it exhibit the systemic functioning implicit within the cosmos without the involvement of consciousness as its immanent ground and support? Moreover, what is the purpose of this involvement between consciousness and matter that we know as creation or evolution? The answer to these questions is suggested here. 
In the beginning of this anuccheda, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī states that the abhidheya, or the prescribed means to realize the Absolute, is shown to be bhakti to Bhagavan Vasudeva. This discussion culminated in the two verses cited in the previous anuccheda, which provide the answer to Saunaka's second question (SB 1.1.11) about the essential practice recommended by all scriptures. Śrī Jīva then makes the point that the present verse verifies Vasudeva as the synthesis (samanvaya) of all scriptures and, hence, the end toward which the abhidheya is to be directed. In the next anuccheda, he confirms that bhakti to Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa is the means by citing the dialogue between Śrī Nārada and Vyasa that led to the self-disclosure of Srimad Bhāgavata. 
159 
2 Narada Instructs Vyasa 
