+++
title = "024"
+++
Attached Householders Are Concerned 
Only with Mundane Topics 
२४ । तदेवं “भक्तिरेवाभिधेयं वस्तु” इत्युक्तम् । तथैव श्रीशुकपरीक्षित्संवादोपक्रमेऽपि (2TTO 21212)- 
IN THIS manner, bhakti alone has been determined to be the abhidheya-vastu, or the discipline to be set forth and taken up. This exact conclusion is also espoused in the beginning of the dialogue between Śrī Suka and King Parikṣit: 
श्रोतव्यादीनि राजेन्द्र नृणां सन्ति सहस्रशः । 
अपश्यतामात्मतत्त्वं गृहेषु गृहमेधिनाम् ॥ ४० ॥ इत्यादि । 
O King, there are thousands of topics to be heard, discussed, and pondered by human beings who are attached to their homes, absorbed in household affairs, and blind to the truth of the Self. (SB 2.1.2)1 
गृहेष्वित्यादिकमुपलक्षणं बहिर्मुखानाम् । आत्मतत्त्वं भगवत्तत्त्वं तथा निगमयिष्यमाण- त्वात् ॥ 
1 
The words grheṣu gṛha-medhinam, "by human beings who are attached to their homes and absorbed in household affairs," are indicative of all those whose intentful regard is directed away from Reality (bahir-mukhānām). The words atma-tattvam, 
śrotavyādīni rajendra nṛṇām santi sahasraśaḥ 
apasyatām ātma-tattvam grheşu gṛha-medhinām 
173 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
"the truth of the Self," mean "the truth of Bhagavan” (bhagavat- tattvam), as will be verified ahead [in the conclusion of Suka's response to Parikṣit's question, cited in the next anuccheda]. 
Commentary 
THE ETYMOLOGICAL meaning of the word abhidheya is "the name- able," from abhidha, “a name or appellation." This refers to the subject, or that which is to be expressed. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī uses this term in the sense of vidheya, "the discipline to be set forth and taken up." The intent of scripture is not simply to provide us with a description of Reality but to recommend a practice that grants direct experience of the Reality so described. Thus, the real message of scripture lies in its vidheya. The vidheya can be stated directly in the form of an injunction, using the optative, or poten- tial, case, or implied indirectly by describing the greatness of the subject. As an example of the latter, if it is publicized that a cer- tain mountain contains golden ore, such a description would natu- rally impel those seeking wealth to go and search for the gold. Such indirect instruction is called siddha-upadesa. Bearing this meaning in mind, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi uses the word abhidheya in the sense of vidheya. 
The final chapter of the First Canto of Srimad Bhagavata describes the meeting between King Parikṣit and Śrī Sukadeva. The king had been cursed to die from the bite of the snake Takşaka after one week. Taking advantage of this warning, Parikşit renounced his kingdom to seek out the meaning of life in his final days. By divine arrangement, he met the sage Śrī Sukadeva and inquired as to the duty of one on the verge of death. Śri Suka begins his reply in the first chapter of the Second Canto. In the first verse, he praises the very question itself, because its answer is beneficial to all humanity, since everyone must face inevitable death: 
174 
24 Attached Householders Are Concerned Only with Mundane Topics 
O King, this question of yours, submitted with a view to the welfare of the world, is most excellent. It is approved by the knowers of the Absolute for it is the topmost subject of all that is worthy to be heard by human beings. (SB 2.1.1)2 
From this beginning point, Śrī Śuka describes the plight of those who are entangled in household life in the next three verses, including the one cited in this anuccheda. For them, there are innu- merable topics to be heard (śrotavya), discussed (kirtitavya), and remembered (smartavya), but none of them are of essential value to the self. In the next two verses, he sums up their predicament as follows: 
O King! Their life is stolen away at night by sleep and sexual indul- gence, and during the day, by pursuing wealth and maintaining their family members. Such attached householders are maddened by affection for their bodies, children, and wives, all of which, although essentially unreal, are regarded by them as veritable extensions and guardians of the self. In this condition, although having witnessed that all these things must meet their end, they behave as though they don't see it at all. (SB 2.1.3-4)3 
The situation at present is much worse. There is virtually no division between the nocturnal activities of sleep and sexual indul- gence and the diurnal activities related to the pursuit of wealth and bodily maintenance. Both sets of activities are indulged in unreservedly day and night. The bonds of affection between fam- ily members have severely deteriorated. Marriages are no longer stable. Hardly any consideration is given to religion, God, or the afterlife in the course of daily affairs. Life is primarily centered around the pursuits of wealth and sex. Most of the topics that occupy attention are related to these two subjects, either directly or indirectly. 
2 
3 
variyan eşa te prasnah kṛto loka-hitam nṛpa 
atmavit-sammataḥ pursam śrotavyädişu yah parah dehapatya-kalatrådisv atma-sainyeşv asatsv api teṣām pramatto nidhanam pasyann api na pasyati nidraya hriyate naktam vyavayena ca va vayaḥ divă cărthehayā räjan kutumba-bharaṇena vā 
175 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
In the concluding verse from this series (SB 2.1.5), Śrī Sukadeva provides the answer to King Parīkṣit's question, specifying what is to be heard, discussed, and remembered by all human beings, especially one on the verge of death. This is the subject of the next anuccheda. 
176 
