+++
title = "025"
+++
Śuka Recommends Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
२५ | निगमयति ( भा० २।१।५ ) - 
ŚRI SUKA sums up his response in the following words: 
तस्माद् भारत सर्वात्मा भगवानीश्वरो हरिः । 
श्रोतव्यः कीर्तितव्यश्च स्मर्तव्यश्चेच्छताभयम् ॥ ४१ ॥ 
Therefore, O descendant of Bharata, a person seeking ultimate release from all fear should hear about, glorify, and remember Bhagavan Hari [Krsna], who is the Supreme Master (Iśvara) and the Immanent Self of all beings. (SB 2.1.5)1 
टीकाच - "सर्वात्मेति प्रेष्ठत्वमाह भगवानिति सौन्दर्यम् । ईश्वर इत्यावश्यकत्वं हरिरिति बन्धहारित्वम् । अभयं मोक्षमिच्छता" इत्येषा । 
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments: "By the word sarvātmā, 'the Immanent Self of all beings,' Suka indicates that Bhagavan Hari is the entity who is most dear to all beings; by the word bhagavăn, lit., 'He who is intrinsically self-endowed with all opulence,' he refers to His all-attractive beauty (saundaryam); by the word isvara, 'the Supreme Master,' he points out the obligatory nature of the acts of hearing and so on; and by the word hari, 'He who takes away,' he conveys the idea that Bhagavan removes all bondage. The word abhayam, 'ultimate release from all fear,' means 'liberation' (mokşa)." 
1 
tasmad bharata sarvātmā bhagavan iśvaro harih śrotavyah kirtitavyaś ca smartavyas cecchatabhayam 
177 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
मोक्षस्तु सर्वक्लेशशान्तिपूर्वकभगवत्प्राप्तिरेवेति ज्ञेयम् ॥ 
It should be understood that the word moksa here [in Svämipäda's comment] refers specifically to the attainment of Bhagavān accompanied by the cessation of all miseries. 
Commentary 
IN THIS verse, Sukadeva answers King Parikṣit's question regarding the subject that is imperative for all human beings to hear about, discuss, and remember (SB 1.19.37-38). The king's inquiry was impelled by the premonition he received of his imminent death. The root of all fear is the fear of death; all other fears are based on this alone. As discussed in Anuccheda 1 (with reference to SB 11.2.37), fear arises from absorption in the body, which is grounded in the prior nonawareness of Bhagavan. Consequently, the solution to fear involves the turning of awareness in the form of bhakti to Bhagavan, which begins with hearing about Him (śravanam). There are millions of topics to be heard by human beings, but among them, the most essential is that which pertains to the Supreme Reality, the ultimate goal of life, the Supreme Person, Bhagavan. 
In this verse, the epithet "Hari," being a proper noun, is the substantive, and the words ātmā, bhagavan, and isvara are its modifiers. The word ātmā (lit., "the Self") conveys the sense of that which is most dear, because in the body the self is most dear. Without the self, the body along with all its limbs has no utility. We love our bodies because we mistake them for our self. 
Extending this consideration, Krsna is the Self of all individual selves (sarvātmā), and hence His dearness exceeds all. This was discussed already in Paramatma Sandarbha, Anuccheda 28. Thus, by the modifier sarvātmā, Sukadeva intends to say that because Hari (Krṣṇa) is the dearest to all, He is the entity to be heard about, discussed, and remembered. Hearing and speaking about one's dearest beloved is natural. Such being the case, what need is there for 
178 
25 Suka Recommends Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
an injunction to do so? The reply is that people in general are ignorant of the fact that Hari is the Self present in their own hearts and thus the dearest possible object. The injunction is given simply to bring attention to this undisclosed truth. 
The word bhagavan was also analyzed in great detail in Bhagavat Sandarbha, Anuccheda 3. Bhagavan refers to that entity who is replete with the six majesties (bhagas) in the form of controlling potency (aiśvarya), inconceivable power (virya), fame (yasa), wealth (śriya), omniscience (jñāna), and detachment (vairagya) to the highest state of completion. In this instance, Śrīdhara Svāmi takes the word bhagavan to mean beauty (saundarya), which is the essence of all six majesties, because beauty refers to all opulences that naturally captivate one's attention. Again, the sense is that because Bhagavan Hari is self-endowed with all-attractive qualities, He is the entity to be heard about, discussed, and remembered. 
The word isvara refers to that entity who is self-endowed with controlling potency and who is thus the regulator of primordial nature and the living beings. He is the one who supplies all our needs and who is therefore essential for our existence. As the regulator, He is also "the Supreme Master," implying that all beings, by their constitutional nature, are compelled to serve Him. Thus, the word isvara suggests the obligatory nature (avasyakatvam) of the acts of hearing, glorification, and remembrance in regard to Bhagavan Hari. 
The word hari is derived from the Sanskrit root √hr, meaning "to take away." On this basis, the epithet "Hari" means "He who takes away our bondage." The word hari has various connotations, including Visnu, Indra, Śiva, Brahman, Yama, the sun, the moon, fire, wind, a lion, a frog, a monkey, and so on. Its most explicit or direct meaning, however, is Bhagavan Viṣṇu or Kṛṣṇa. Once again, the sense of the epithet "Hari" is that since He is the entity who removes our bondage, He is the one to be heard about and so on. 
Sukadeva further qualifies his response by saying that the acts of hearing about, discussing, and remembering Bhagavan Hari are to be taken up particularly by those seeking ultimate release from all fear (abhayam icchata). This effectively includes all human 
179 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
beings, because there is no one who would not wish to be free of fear, especially that of death. Consequently, the recommendation to hear, glorify, and remember Hari is applicable to all humanity without exception. Sridhara Svami glosses the word abhaya as mokşa, or "liberation." Freedom from fear comes about when one knows that death is an illusion. Liberation entails emancipation from death and thus freedom from fear in the true sense. Bhakti is the supreme liberation, because it brings an end to all sorts of fears and misery. 
In the next three anucchedas, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī explains that the purpose of meditating on the Virat Purusa, Bhagavan's Cosmic Form, is to attain pure devotion. 
180 
