+++
title = "034"
+++
Merely Living Is Not the Fruit of Human Life 
३४ । ननु जीवनादिकमेव तेषामायुषः फलमस्तु ? तत्राह ( भा० २।३।१८) - 
IN OBJECTION to the above statement, one may question, "Is not living itself, with all that it entails, the fruit of their lives?" To this Saunaka responds: 
तरवः किं न जीवन्ति भस्त्राः किं न श्वसन्त्युत । 
न खादन्ति न मेहन्ति किं ग्रामे पशवोऽपरे ॥ ५३ ॥ 
Do the trees not live? Do the bellows not breathe? Do the other animals in the village not eat and copulate? (SB 2.3.18)1 
न मेहन्ति न मैथुनं कुर्वन्ति । तानपि नराकारान् पशून् मत्वाह - अपर इति ॥ 
Together with the particle of negation (na), the verb mehanti, lit., "to wastefully discharge vital fluid," means "do they not engage in copulation (maithuna)?" Considering even humans to be animals in human form, Saunaka deliberately used the words "the other animals" (pasavaḥ apare). 
Commentary 
IN OBJECTION to the previous verse, it could be argued that non- devotees live, and this itself is the fruit of a long life on this earth. 
1taravah kim na jivanti bhastrah kim na svasanty uta 
na khadanti na mehanti kim grame pašavo'pare 
219 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
Saunaka counters this suggestion, asking how, by this criterion alone, are they any better than trees, which also live, many of them much longer than human beings? 
The opponent may then retort, "Well, human beings are not only alive like trees and plants, but they also breathe through tiny air sacs in the lungs." To this Saunaka responds that the bellows of a village blacksmith also breathes through an air sac, and even much more efficiently than human beings. 
The opponent then counters by pointing out that the bellows does not enjoy the pleasures of eating and having sex. To this Śau- naka replies that village animals, like dogs, asses, and monkeys, can eat and enjoy sex much more unreservedly than human beings. So how are humans superior to them? 
To equate such human beings to animals, Saunaka uses the pronoun apare, "the other ones," as a qualifier of the word pasa- vaḥ, "animals," distinguishing the animals of the village from the human animals, both of which are, however, animals. On the basis of this correspondence, most of humanity would be considered in the category of "other animals." This also implies that they are wast- ing their lives. In this regard, there is a famous statement from Hitopadeśa: 
Hunger, sleep, fear, and the sexual urge are common to human beings and animals, but the capacity for dharma is the additional unique quality of human beings that sets them apart from ani- mals. Without dharma, human beings are equivalent to animals. (Hitopadesa 1.25)2 
2 āhāra-nidra-bhaya-maithunam ca samanyam etat pasubhir narāṇām dharmo hi teṣām adhiko višeso dharmena hinah pasubhiḥ samanah 
220 
