+++
title = "054"
+++
Rahūgaṇa Emphasizes the Importance of Advanced Devotee-sanga 
५४ । यथोक्तमेतदनन्तरं श्रीरहूगणेनैव ( भा०५ | १३ | २१-२२ ) - 
AFTER hearing the above statement, King Rahugaņa spoke as follows: 
अहो नृजन्माखिलजन्मशोभनं किं जन्मभिस्त्वपरैरप्यमुष्मिन् । 
न यद्वृषीकेशयशः कृतात्मनां महात्मनां वः प्रचुरः समागमः ॥ ८६ ॥ न ह्यद्भुतं त्वच्चरणाब्जरेणुभिर्हतांहसो भक्तिरधोक्षजेऽमला । 
मौहूर्तिकाद् यस्य समागमाच्च मे दुस्तर्कमूलोऽपहतोऽविवेकः ॥ ८७ ॥ इति । 
Indeed, birth as a human being is the most auspicious of all pos- sible births. What is the benefit of any other birth, even as a deva in heaven? For there, the association of great sages like you, whose hearts are illuminated by the glories of Bhagavan Hrṣikesa [Krsna], is hardly to be found. 
It is no surprise at all that those whose sins [lit., "anxious self-doubts" (amhas)] have been cleansed by the dust from your lotus feet, attain untainted devotion unto Bhagavan Adhokṣaja [Kṛṣṇa]. My illusion [lit., "absence of discrimi- nation" (aviveka)], rooted in ill logic, has been completely dispelled just by a moment's association with you. (SB 5.13.21- 22)1 
aho nr-janmākhila-janma-sobhanam kim janmabhis tv aparair apy amusmin yad-dhrṣikesa-yasah-kṛtatmanām mahatmanām vaḥ pracuraḥ samagamaḥ na hy adbhutam tvac-caranabja-renubhir hatamhaso bhaktir adhoksaje mala mauhurtikad yasya samagamac ca me dustarka-mulo'pahato vivekaḥ 
295 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
स्पष्टम् ॥ ब्राह्मणो रहूगणम् ॥ 
The meaning of these statements is self-evident. 
Commentary 
KING RAHŪGANA felt blessed by the teachings of the brāhmaṇa, Jada Bharata, whom he had mistakenly engaged in carrying his palanquin. As soon as Jada Bharata began to speak, the king could immediately feel the influence of his association. All his doubts were thereby dispelled, and there was a surge of bhakti in his heart. In this spirit, he could not help but express his feelings and gratitude to his teacher. 
King Rahūgana professed that he considered birth as a human being superior even to birth as a deva in heaven, because human beings have access to the association of highly self-realized devo- tees and are thereby enabled to participate in bhakti. Such asso- ciation is hardly available even in heaven because devotees have no interest in going to heaven, which is a place of excessive sen- sual enjoyment. Devotees prefer to dwell on earth, where there are innumerable holy places related to Bhagavan and His devotees. By availing of the association of advanced devotees, one can attain perfection even within the relatively brief span of human life. On this account, even the devas feel jealousy toward human beings, as attested to by the sage Drumila: 
2 
The devas place many obstacles in the path of those who are estab- lished in sevā to You and who are proceeding to Your supreme abode, bypassing the devas' own planets. But the devas do not present such obstacles for others who offer oblations to them as their share in sacrifice. Because, however, You are the protector of Your devotees, they cross beyond, stepping on the heads of all obstacles. (SB 11.4.10)2 
tvām sevatam sura-krta bahavo'ntarayaḥ 
svauko vilanghya paramam vrajatām padam te nanyasya barhişi balin dadataḥ sva-bhāgan dhatte padam tvam avita yadi vighna-mūrdhni 
296 
54 Rahugana Emphasizes the Importance of Advanced Devotee-sanga 
Human birth is exceedingly rare and precious, but even more valuable yet is the grace of a devotee. Unless one obtains a devo- tee's grace, he or she ends up wasting this rare opportunity of human life in material pursuits. The symptom of grace is that one's awareness becomes turned toward Bhagavan. This is the mean- ing that one's sins have become cleansed (hatamhasaḥ). Rahugaṇa would not have understood the teachings of Jada Bharata without the latter's grace. 
Next, Śri Jiva Gosvāmī refers to Śrī Sankarṣaṇa's instructions to King Citraketu, followed by Prahlada's lecture to his classmates. 
See Anuccheda 64 for further discussion of this verse. 
297 
13 Prahlada Instructs His Classmates 
Anucchedas 55-57 
