+++
title = "067"
+++
The Futility of Jñana Devoid of Bhakti 
६७ । अग्रे च ज्ञानयोगस्य केवलस्यासाध्यत्वं भक्तियोगस्य तु सुखसाध्यत्वमानुषङ्गिक- तया ज्ञानजनकत्वं स्वयमपि पुरुषार्थत्वं चेति । 
FURTHER ahead, Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa elaborates on the infeasibility of perfecting kevala-jñāna-yoga [i.e., the radical intuition of the self as Brahman, independent of devotion], and on the ease of perfecting bhakti-yoga. He also makes the point that bhakti gives rise to immediate insight (jñāna) as a concomitant effect and that bhakti itself is the ultimate end to be attained (puruṣārtha). 
यथा ( भा० ११ | ११ | १७ ) - 
1 
The discussion proceeds as follows: 
न कुर्यान् न वदेत् किञ्चिन् न ध्यायेत् साध्वसाधु वा । आत्मारामोऽनया वृत्त्या विचरेज् जडवन् मुनिः ॥ ११४ ॥ 
A contemplative sage should neither do, nor speak, nor reflect upon either virtue or vice. By adhering to this attitude of utter indifference, the sage who delights in the self alone should roam about like a person altogether devoid of sense (jada-vat). (SB 11.11.17) ' 
इत्यन्तेन ग्रन्थेन ज्ञानयोगमुक्त्वा भक्तियोगमुद्भावयितुमाह (भा० ११।११।१८) - 
na kuryān na vadet kincin na dhyayet sadhv asādhu va ātmārāmo'nayā vrttya vicarej jada-van munik 
372 
67 The Futility of Jñana Devoid of Bhakti 
Having concluded His instructions on jñāna-yoga with the latter verse, Kṛṣṇa makes the following statement as a lead-in to the discussion on bhakti-yoga: 
शब्दब्रह्मणि निष्णातो न निष्णायात् परे यदि । श्रुतस्तस्य श्रमफलो ह्यधेनुमिव रक्षतः ॥ ११५ ॥ 
If a person has thoroughly studied the Sonic Brahman [i.e., the Vedas], but has not brought attention to bear on the Transcen- dent Brahman, his effort results in nothing but the labor itself, like that of a person who maintains a cow whose milk has dried- up. (SB 11.11.18)2 
अत्र परब्रह्मपदेन परतत्त्वमात्रमुच्यते न तु ब्रह्मत्वभगवत्त्वादिविवेकेनेति ज्ञेयं सर्वत्र तत्सामान्यात् । तदेवं शब्दब्रह्माभ्यासस्य परब्रह्माभ्यासः प्रयोजनमित्युक्तम् । तत्र सर्वे- ष्वेवांशेषु विशेषत उपनिषद्भागे शब्दब्रह्मणस्तत्प्रतिपादकत्वे स्थितेऽपि तद्विचारकोटि- भिरपि परब्रह्मनिष्ठा न जायते किन्तु तस्य यस्मिन्नंशे श्रीभगवदाकारपरब्रह्मलीलादिकं प्रतिपाद्यते तदभ्यासेनैव भगवदाकारे ब्रह्माकारे च निष्ठा जायते । 
In this verse, the word para-brahma signifies "the Transcendent Reality," in general terms, without distinguishing its specific self-disclosures as Brahman, Bhagavan, or Paramātmā. This is due to the fact that what is stated in the verse applies identi- cally in regard to all self-disclosures of the [one] Transcendent Reality. In other words, what is being asserted is that the pur- pose of studying the sound form of Brahman (sabda-brahma- abhyasa) is to bring attention to bear on the Transcendent Brah- man (para-brahma-abhyasa) [whatever one's conception of that Reality might be]. 
Although Parabrahman is established as the subject to be elu- cidated by the sabda-brahma in all of its divisions, and espe- cially in the Upanisads, firm faith (niṣṭhā) in Parabrahman is not aroused even by deliberating on the Upanisads millions of times. Only by focusing attention on those parts of the sabda- brahma that propound the divine acts (lila) and other features 
2 sabda-brahmani niṣṇāto na niṣṇāyāt pare yadi 
śramas tasya śrama-phalo hy adhenum iva rakṣataḥ 
373 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
of Parabrahman in the form of Sri Bhagavan, does niṣṭhā arise in regard to Bhagavan as well as Brahman. 
तदुक्तम् (भा० १२।४।४० ) - 
This is indicated in the following statement of Śrī Śuka: 
संसारसिन्धुमतिदुस्तरमुत्तितीर्षोर्नान्यः प्लवो भगवतः पुरुषोत्तमस्य । लीलाकथारसनिषेवणमन्तरेण पुंसो भवेद् विविधदुःखदवार्द्दितस्य ॥ ११६ ॥ 
For a person tormented by the forest fire of manifold miseries and aspiring to cross the insurmountable ocean of material exis- tence (samsara), there is no vessel other than absorption in the aesthetic rapture (rasa) of the narrations of the divine play of Bhagavan Purusottama [Śrī Kṛṣṇa]. (SB 12.4.40)3 
भा० १०॥१४॥४- 
The same conclusion is affirmed by Brahma: 
श्रेयःसृतिं भक्तिमुदस्य ते विभो क्लिश्यन्ति ये केवलबोधलब्धये । तेषामसौ क्लेशल एव शिष्यते नान्यद् यथा स्थूलतुषावघातिनाम् || ११७ || 
O almighty Lord, those who discard bhakti unto You, which is the means to supreme blessedness, and strive instead to attain realization of the radically unqualified Absolute, are left in the end with nothing more than their own labor, like those engaged in threshing coarse husks devoid of grain. (SB 10.14.4)* 
Commentary 
IN CHAPTERS seven to ten of the Eleventh Canto, Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructs Uddhava primarily in jñāna-yoga. This continues up to midway through chapter eleven. In this regard, the purpose of karma-yoga 
3 
4 
samsara-sindhum ati-dustaram uttitirsor 
nanyaḥ plavo bhagavataḥ purusottamasya 
lila-katha-rasa-nisevanam antarena 
pumso bhaved vividha-duḥkha-davārdditasya 
śreyaḥ-sṛtim bhaktim udasya te vibho klisyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye 
teşăm asau klesala eva sisyate nanyad yatha sthula-tusavaghatinām 
374 
67 The Futility of Jñana Devoid of Bhakti 
is to purify the heart of all attachment and lead one to jñāna-yoga. Jñana-yoga is based on the awakening of detachment and knowl- edge of the distinction between the conscious self (ātmā) and mat- ter (prakṛti), which constitutes the covering of the atma in the form of the psychic and physical bodies. The ultimate aim of jñāna-yoga or of the jñāna-marga is to attain the liberated state of identity con- sciousness in Brahman (i.e., sayujya-mukti or sayujya-mokṣa). This state, however, is abhorred by those who adhere to the path of bhakti-yoga, because such radical identity consciousness with the Absolute obviates any possibility of loving exchange between the devotee and Bhagavān. 
This attitude is illustrated in the following verses, collected by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in his Padyavali: 
bhaktiḥ seva bhagavato muktis tat-pada-langhanam 
ko mūḍho dāsatām präpya prabhavam padam icchati 
Bhakti entails divine service to Bhagavan, whereas liberation dis- regards His lotus feet. After attaining the constitutional state of divine servitorship, what fool would then aspire to the condition of unqualified identity with God? (Padyavali 110) 
bhava-bandha-cchide tasyai spṛhayami na muktaye bhavan prabhur aham dasa iti yatra vilupyate 
I do not aspire for liberation, in order to be free from material bondage, for in such liberation the experiential awareness that You are my Lord and I am Your servant is altogether lost. (Padyāvalī 111) 
hanta citriyate mitra smṛtva tan mama mānasam vivekino'pi ye kuryus tṛṣṇām atyantike laye 
Alas, my friend, whenever I reflect upon it, my mind still mar- vels at the thought of those who, although otherwise possessed of fine discrimination, hanker for the absolute dissolution of the self. (Padyāvalī 112) 
It may be noted that the word jñāna is used in the sense of iden- tity consciousness specifically in the context of jñana-yoga. When the same word is used in relation to bhakti, it means knowledge and 
375 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
intellectual intuition pertaining to Bhagavan, as concerns the onto- logical status of His name, form, qualities, associates, abode, and divine play. Such knowledge is nondifferent from bhakti. It is often the case that the adherents of bhakti-yoga mistakenly consider the in-depth study of the metaphysics of bhakti as equivalent to the cul- tivation of jñāna within the system of jñāna-yoga. On this basis, they shun even such knowledge related to devotion, thinking that bhakti should be free of any taint of jñana. This is a widely preva- lent misconception and a major obstacle to progress on the path of bhakti. Without first apprehending Bhagavan and bhakti in their ontological depth, as elaborated by the Gosvāmis, the practice of uttama-bhakti tends to get reduced to emotionality or conventional religiosity. 
In this anuccheda, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī reveals a very telling fact that could, however, be interpreted as a biased view by the adher- ents of other paths. But he extracts this revolutionary idea from the sastra itself and not from any personal opinion. He demon- strates by the verses cited in this anuccheda that jñāna-yoga cannot bring forth its result without the grace of bhakti. The reason for this is that the practice of jñāna-yoga is based on detachment and control of the mind along with the senses. These practices, in and of themselves, being impelled by sattva-guna, cannot lead to tran- scendence or liberation. As they are concerned, still, with the sep- arated self, striving through personal efforts, they lead to no more than sattva-guna. 
The next challenge then for the practitioner along this path is how to become free of sattva-guna. One may contend that sattva leads to jñāna (sattvät sañjāyate jñānam, GĪTĀ 14.17) and that sattva bestows realization of Brahman, as stated in the second chapter of the First Canto (sattvam yad brahma-darśanam, SB 1.2.24). This was discussed in Anuccheda 18 of this volume and in Paramātma Sandarbha, Anucchedas 12-13. But this brahma-darśana does not come about without bhakti. This was explicitly stated by Sūta Gosvāmī earlier in the same chapter (SB 1.2.12, cited in Anuccheda 7). The same is also confirmed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa in response to Arjuna's question about the means to transcend the material gunas: 
376 
67 The Futility of Jñana Devoid of Bhakti 
A person who serves Me alone through unswerving devotion, com- pletely transcends these gunas of nature and becomes eligible to realize Brahman. (GĪTĀ 14.26)5 
The view that bhakti, being the essence of Bhagavan's svayam- prakāśa-svarūpa-sakti, is the effective agent in the self-disclosure of the Absolute as Brahman, turns the radical nondualist view of jñāna-yoga on its head. In the latter's opinion, bhakti is a conces- sion for the less intelligent so that they can fix their mind on an external form of God. After becoming purified thereby, they can finally meditate on and realize their identity with Brahman. This claim, however, is without any scriptural basis. Indeed, what they claim is both contradictory to the words of sastra and inadequate to the scrutiny of logic, as elaborated below. 
In Bhagavat Sandarbha, it was conclusively established that Brahman is the unqualified self-disclosure of the tattva, the Abso- lute Reality. This is to say that Brahman is the particular self- disclosure of the Absolute that keeps Its own intrinsic potency concealed and hence shows Itself as devoid of qualification. In con- trast, Bhagavan is the unconcealed self-disclosure of one and the same Absolute that shows Itself as intrinsically self-endowed with Its own potency. From this perspective, Brahman is the partial or concealed view of the tattva, whereas Bhagavan is Its utterly complete self-disclosure. Such being the case, how can devotion to Bhagavan be for the less intelligent? 
It is true that the non-intellectually oriented can perform bhakti more easily than undertaking the rigorous course of study and detachment required for the path of jñana-yoga, but that in itself does not imply that bhakti is only for the less intelligent. It is the universal characteristic of bhakti that it is joyfully executed irre- spective of the caliber of the practitioner. For this reason, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī writes that bhakti is easily perfected, sukha-sādhyatvam. Moreover, bhakti bestows knowledge and intellectual intuition of 
5 
măm ca yo'vyabhicarena bhakti-yogena sevate 
sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhūyaya kalpate 
377 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
the Absolute, jñāna-janakatvam, which includes the immediate intuition of Brahman, the aim of jñāna-yoga. 
It is for these reasons that after concluding His instructions on jñāna-yoga, Śrī Kṛṣṇa begins to instruct Uddhava in bhakti-yoga, opening the discussion with SB 11.11.18. The implication of Śrī Krsna's statement is that one should first study the sound form of Brahman (i.e., the sastra) and become profoundly versed in its philosophical conclusions (sabda-brahmani niṣnātah). This is meant to lead to the immediate intuition of the Transcendent Brah- man (para-brahmani nisnātah). Krsna asserts that if after studying the Sonic Brahman, one does not bring attention to bear on the Transcendent Brahman, his effort is in vain. This state of affairs is true for all varieties of practitioners, be they jñānis, yogis, or bhaktas. 
Śrī Jīva makes another critical observation that illustrates bhakti's unique status and ease of practice. He boldly states that although Parabrahman is the subject delineated in the Upanisads, firm faith (nistha) in Parabrahman is not evoked in the practitioner even by deliberating on the Upanisads millions of times. Only by focusing attention on those parts of the sabda-brahma that delin- eate Bhagavan's lila is niṣṭhā evoked in regard to Parabrahman self-disclosed as Bhagavan. It is indeed practically evidenced that jñānis and yogis often listen to or give discourses on Krsna's stories while re-interpreting them in accordance with their respective points of view (siddhanta). It is rarely the case that jñānīs and yogis offer public discourses purely on the principles pertaining to their respective paths. 
In validation of his observation regarding the connection between nistha in Parabrahman and the lilă portions of the sabda- brahma, Śrī Jīva cites the concluding statement of Śrī Suka's dis- course to King Parikṣit, in which he recommends exclusive absorp- tion in lila-katha-rasa. In the next anuccheda, Śrī Jiva continues to stress the importance of hearing those parts of the śăstra that contain the narrations of Krsna's lilā. 
378 
