+++
title = "068"
+++
Kṛṣṇa Disregards Speech Devoid of His Līlā-kathā — I 
६८ । अत एव मदीयलीलाशून्यां वैदिकीमपि वाचं नाभ्यसेदित्याह द्वाभ्याम् (भा० ११।११।१९ ) - 
IN CONSEQUENCE of His latter statement, Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa makes the point in the next two verses that even the words of the Vedas that are bereft of His divine līlās do not merit attention: 
गां दुग्धदोहामसतीं च भार्यां देहं पराधीनमसत्प्रजां च । वित्तं त्वतीर्थीकृतमङ्ग वाचं हीनां मया रक्षति दुःखदुःखी ॥ ११८ ॥ 
O dearest Uddhava, a person who maintains a cow that does not yield any milk, an unchaste wife, a body that is subservient to others, unworthy progeny, wealth not sanctified by offering it to a worthy recipient, and speech bereft of Me [i.e., of My lilas], suffers misery after misery. (SB 11.11.19)1 
मया श्रीभगवता हीनां मम लीलादिशून्याम् ॥ 
The words maya hīnām, "bereft of Me," mean, "bereft of Sri Bhagavan," or in other words, "[speech] bereft of My lilas and other divine attributes." 
1 
gam dugdha-dohām asatim ca bharyam deham parādhinam asat-prajām ca vittam tv atirthi-kṛtam anga vācam hīnāṁ mayā rakṣati duḥkha-duḥkhi 
379 
Commentary 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
IN THIS verse, Krsna clearly asserts that even Vedic study results only in misery if it is devoid of His līlās. He gives five examples to illustrate how this is so. The first is to maintain a barren cow with the hope that one day she will give birth to a calf and then provide milk. There is much labor in maintaining a cow and frustration when one realizes that it is barren. 
The second example is that of an unchaste wife. The husband supports her, but enjoys neither a congenial relationship with her, because she is in love with her paramour, nor the progeny to which she gives birth, due to doubts regarding the identity of the biological father. The third example is that of a slave. A slave suffers because he is denied freedom and also because his bodily needs are not satisfied. 
The fourth example is that of unworthy progeny. The parents are compelled by blood relationship to maintain even such children, but these children openly oppose their wishes and treat them with disdain. Such progeny are only a source of frustration for their parents. The last example is that of wealth that has not been sanctified by offering a portion of it in charity to an eligible person. Such wealth breeds only detrimental karma, which will result in misery. Later in the same dialogue (SB 11.23.17-19), Śrī Kṛṣṇa lists fifteen vices related to wealth. The bearing of these five types of fruitless burdens results in misery alone. Accordingly, study of the Vedas bereft of lila-katha-rasa is simply troublesome. 
In the next anuccheda, Kṛṣṇa expands on the meaning of the phrase "speech bereft of Me" (mayā hīnām vācam), mentioned in the verse cited in the present anuccheda. 
380 
