+++
title = "077"
+++
The Reason for the Propagation 
of Other Paths 
७७ । तदेवं सति तस्यामेवानेकविधश्रेयोवदने हेतुमाह ( भा० ११।१४ ।९ ) - 
SUCH BEING THE case [that bhakti is the priorly existent means disclosed by Bhagavan Himself], Śrī Kṛṣṇa explains later in the same section of verses the reason why various other methods are spoken of as productive of the highest good: 
मन्मायामोहितधियः पुरुषाः पुरुषर्षभ । 
श्रेयो वदन्त्यनेकान्तं यथाकर्म यथारुचि ॥ १२८ ॥ 
O best of men, human beings whose discernment is deluded by My extrinsic potency advocate many different methods to attain the ultimate good, in accordance with their past karmic impressions and individual predilection. (SB 11.14.9)' 
तत्प्रकृतीनां मायागुणमूलत्वात् मन्मायामोहितधियः । अनेकान्तं नानाविधं श्रेयः पुरुषार्थं 
तत्साधनं च ॥ 
1 
Because their phenomenally embedded natures (prakṛti) are rooted in the gunas of the extrinsic potency (māyā), their dis- cernment (dhi) is bewildered by My maya. The word anekāntam [qualifying śreyah] means, "of various types" (nānā-vidham), and the word śreyaḥ, "the Good," refers both to the ultimate end (puruşărtha) and the means to attain it (tat-sadhana). 
1 man-maya-mohita-dhiyah purusah puruşarsabha 
śreyo vadanty anekantam yatha-karma yatha-ruci 
406 
77 The Reason for the Propagation of Other Paths 
Commentary 
IT IS in the very constitution of materially conditioned existence that human beings are subject to the influence of Bhagavan's māyā. No conditioned being can have a single thought that is altogether free of maya's influence. All embodied beings carry residual impressions (samskāras), embedded in the psyche, from past and present lives. These saṁskāras operate like default mecha- nisms, giving rise to likes and dislikes. Such personal preferences influence our decision-making. It is thus inevitable that whatever decision a person makes is colored by his or her samskāras. 
In the field of religion and morality as well, an individual is drawn to a particular path based on his or her samskāras. This was pointed out earlier by Sūta Gosvāmi, rajas tamaḥ prakṛtayaḥ sama-sila bhajanti vai, "Those whose nature is predominantly influ- enced by rajas and tamas certainly worship in accordance with such nature" (SB 1.2.27, discussed in Anuccheda 20). Whatever a person is attracted to is considered by him to be of the greatest value. Since he values it above all else, he will also advocate it to others for their well-being. 
Taking this into consideration, different sages have propagated distinct paths that are appropriate for people of different predilec- tions. Patanjali propagated yoga for people inclined toward the path of introversion through meditation, whereas Jaimini propa- gated karma for those who are drawn to the path of extroversion and material pleasure. The followers of Jaimini claim that the path of introversion is meant for those who are socially handicapped and thus incapable of functioning within the context of society. On the other hand, those who are disposed to the path of intro- version assert that the path of karma is for those lacking discern- ment. Each considers their own process to be superior on the basis of their acquired natures. This is the meaning of the phrase man- māyā-mohita-dhiyah, "their intellective capacities are deluded by My extrinsic potency." 
407 
408 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa, however, can never be subject to the influ- ence of māyā, which is subordinate to Him. As such, He is unmis- takably aware of the most highly efficacious means to "the Good" (śreyah) for conditioned human beings. In this regard, He advo- cates only bhakti, because only bhakti is free of the gunas and can thus enable one to transcend the gunas. On this basis, it is under- stood that because Śrī Krsna is the very embodiment and ground of the nirguņa state, only nirguṇa-bhakti can be the source of pleasure for Him. This is confirmed by Krsna Himself in the next verse. 
