+++
title = "079"
+++
Dharma and Jñana Are Impotent without Bhakti 
७९ | तथा ( भा० ११ । १४ । २२ ) - 
ADDITIONALLY, [these other paths are not independent in the bestowal of their respective benefits,] as confirmed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa two verses later: 
धर्मः सत्यदयोपेतो विद्या वा तपसान्विता । मद्भक्त्यापेतमात्मानं न सम्यक् प्रपुनाति हि ॥ १३० ॥ 
Socio-religious duty (dharma) endowed with truth and compassion, or even knowledge (vidya) accompanied by penance, certainly do not completely purify the mind if devoid of devotion to Me. (SB 11.14.22)1 
धर्मो निष्कामः । विद्या शास्त्रीयं ब्रह्मज्ञानम् । तपस्तदीक्षणम् ॥ 
The word dharma, or "socio-religious duty," refers to niṣkāmadharma, or "duty that is performed without any material motive." The word vidya, "knowledge," refers to the knowledge of Brahman, as disclosed in scripture, and tapas, "penance," refers to the focused deliberation on that knowledge. 
1 dharmah satya-dayopeto vidya vä tapasänvită 
mad-bhaktyāpetam ātmānam na samyak prapunāti hi 
412 
79 Dharma and Jñana Are Impotent without Bhakti 
Commentary 
IN THE previous anuccheda, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi established bhakti's preeminence by way of a positive assertion (anvaya), namely, that bhakti subdues Krsna in a manner that other methods cannot. Here he establishes the same conclusion through a negative assertion (vyatireka) that other methods cannot completely purify the heart if devoid of bhakti. 
— 
The real impurity or root deficiency (chidra) is the state of having one's intentful regard beginninglessly diverted away from Bhagavān (vaimukhyata). This was stated in the very beginning of this book (Anuccheda 1). Accordingly, purity means sammukhyatā, or the turning of one's regard toward Bhagavan. Paths other than bhakti are fundamentally unconcerned with the directing of attention toward Bhagavan, or if they do so at all, their focus is not as direct or as complete as in the case of bhakti. From this perspective, although paths such as karma and jñāna involve a certain degree of sammukhyatā toward Reality in general terms, they do not fully purify the heart, because they do not completely eradicate the condition of vaimukhyata in regard to ultimate Reality as Svayam Bhagavan, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. 
In the next anuccheda, Krsna describes how bhakti purifies the heart, thus enabling the capacity to directly intuit subtle truth. 
413 
