+++
title = "080"
+++
The Complete Purifying Power of Bhakti 
८० । भक्तिलक्षणैस्तु (भा० ११ । १४ । २६) - 
IN CONTRAST, by the methods that constitute the very essence of bhakti, [purification is complete ]: 
यथा यथात्मा परिमृज्यतेऽसौ मत्पुण्यगाथाश्रवणाभिधानैः । तथा तथा पश्यति वस्तु सूक्ष्मं चक्षुर्यथैवाञ्जनसम्प्रयुक्तम् ॥ १३१ ॥ 
To whatever extent the mind is purified by hearing and reciting the narrations of My virtuous acts, to that same extent it can intuit the subtle reality, just as the eyes can detect minute objects when treated with therapeutic ointment. (sB 11.14.26) 1 
टीका च - " ननु 'ब्रह्मविदाप्नोति परम्' ( तै०२।१।१) 'तमेव विदित्वातिमृत्युमेति' (श्वे० ३१८) इत्यादिश्रुतिभ्यो ज्ञानादेवाविद्यानिवृत्त्या तत्प्राप्तिरवगम्यते । कुतो भक्तियोगेनेत्युच्यते ? तत्राह - यथा यथेति । आत्मा चित्तं परिमृज्यते शोध्यते मत्पुण्यगाथानां श्रवणैरभिधानैश्च । भक्तेरेवावान्तरव्यापारो ज्ञानं न पृथगित्यर्थः" इत्येषा ॥ श्रीभगवान् ॥ 
1 
Śrīdhara Svāmī comments: "A doubt may be raised in this regard. In the Upanisads, we find the following statements: brahma-vid äpnoti param, "The realized knower of Brahman attains the Supreme' (TU 2.1.1), and tam eva viditvātimṛtyum eti, ‘One transcends death only upon knowing Him' (SU 3.8 ). On the basis of these statements, it is understood that the attainment of the Absolute occurs through the removal of ignorance 
yathā yathātmā parimrjyate'sau mat-punya-gāthā śravanābhidhānaih tatha tatha pasyati vastu sukṣmam cakṣur yathaivānjana-samprayuktam 
414 
80 The Complete Purifying Power of Bhakti 
(avidyā), which is accomplished only by the onset of direct knowing (jñāna). So how can it be said that the Absolute is attained by bhakti? To counter this argument, Bhagavan speaks the present 
verse. 
"The word ātmā here refers to cittam, 'the mind,' which is purified by hearing and relating the narrations of My virtuous acts. This signifies that immediate intuition (jñāna), [referred to in the above-cited Upanisadic statements,] is a subordinate functional capacity (avāntara-vyāpāra) of bhakti itself; it is not a separate or independent function." [Here ends Śrīdhara Svāmi's comment.] 
Commentary 
IN THE previous anuccheda, it was pointed out that other processes do not purify the heart without bhakti. In this verse, Krsna states that bhakti purifies in direct proportion to its intensity. The adherents of jñāna-yoga, however, believe that without jñāna there is no release from bondage, rte jñānāt na muktiḥ. Anticipating this objection, Śrīdhara Svāmī responds that jñāna ensues as a concomitant effect of bhakti. This principle is the unique disclosure of Śrīmad Bhāgavata. Without bhakti, the mere culture of brahma-jñāna cannot grant liberation. 
The Upanisadika statements cited by Śrīdhara Svāmi assume that the practitioner is engaged in bhakti. By the grace of bhakti, one realizes Brahman and then attains Him, brahma-vid äpnoti param (TU 2.1.1). It may be noted that in the Upanisads the word brahma commonly stands for Bhagavan. It does not always mean the qualityless, formless aspect of Reality. If the word brahma in the Taittiriya Upanisad verse referred to unqualified Brahman, then the verb apnoti, "attains," would be meaningless, because to attain something, the person who attains must be distinct from that which is attained. 
The statement from Svetāśvatara Upanisad, tam eva viditvātimrtyum eti, "One transcends death only upon knowing Him," is 
415 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
commonly cited by the adherents of Advaitavada as evidence of the superiority of their path. They interpret the word atimṛtyum as "liberation." Svapneśvara, however, while commenting on Sandilyabhakti-sutra (5), writes that the word atimṛtyu does not mean liberation. He says that it is that which enables one to go beyond death, and that is bhakti? A word can have either a conventional meaning or an etymological meaning. The Advaitavada followers take the conventional meaning of atimṛtyu as "liberation." Svapneśvara argues, however, that liberation is not the conventional meaning of this word. 
The real contention here is whether to take the word atimṛtyu as a single word or as two separate words, ati and mṛtyu. In the first case, the accusative termination is governed by the karaka, or the grammatical case, implying that which is instrumental in bringing about the action, being determined by the verb eti. In the second case, the accusative is governed by the upapada, meaning the adjoining word ati, which is a karma-pravacaniya (PANINI 2.2.19, HNV 6.107). According to the meta-rule that a case ending that is determined by a grammatical case (kāraka) supersedes that which is determined by an adjoining word (upapada), the first of the above two possibilities carries greater weight and is thus to be accepted. 
The meaning of the word atimṛtyu assessed by Svapneśvara also fits well in the context of Svetasvatara Upanisad. The preceding seven verses of the third chapter describe Bhagavan, and not Brahman. The verse cited by Śrīdhara Svāmī (śu 3.8) clearly states that one can transcend death only upon knowing Him (tam). If Brahman was intended, the pronoun tat should have been used instead. The interpretation of atimṛtyu as that which enables one to go beyond death - meaning bhakti - is thus fully appropriate, because it is only by bhakti that Bhagavan is known. 
2 
atimṛtyu-padam na muktau rudhah kintu yasyam satyam mṛtyor atikrama iti vyutpattyä tad apeksaya bhakter mrtyur atikrama iti vyutpadya bhaktim evatimṛtyu-padenābhidhattam upapada-vibhakty arthāpekṣayā kāraka-vibhakty arthasya balavattvāt. 
416 
80 The Complete Purifying Power of Bhakti 
In the next five anucchedas, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī cites Krsna's teaching to Uddhava, in which He recommends bhakti. 
417 
