+++
title = "083"
+++
Krsna Disaffirms Both Jñana and Vairagya 
८३ | तथैवाह (भा० ११ ।२० |३१ ) – 
IN THE same manner, [Śrī Kṛṣṇa disaffirms both jñāna and vairagya] in the next verse: 
तस्मान् मद्भक्तियुक्तस्य योगिनो वै मदात्मनः । 
न ज्ञानं न च वैराग्यं प्रायः श्रेयो भवेदिह ॥ १३४ ॥ 
Therefore, for the yogi who is endowed with bhakti for Me and whose mind is fixed on Me, knowledge and renunciation are not generally conducive to the ultimate good here in this world. (SB 11.20.31)1 
टीका च - " तदेवं व्यवस्थयाधिकारत्रयमुक्तम् । तत्र भक्तेरन्यनिरपेक्षत्वादन्यस्य च तत्सापेक्षत्वाद् भक्तियोग एव श्रेष्ठ इत्युपसंहरति – तस्मादिति त्रिभिः । मदात्मनो मयि आत्मा चित्तं यस्य तस्य । श्रेयः श्रेयःसाधनम्" इत्येषा । 
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments: "Three types of eligibility have thus been described in accordance with their circumscribed limits (vyavastha). Of these three processes, bhakti-yoga alone is said to be paramount, because it is independent of all other processes, whereas the other paths depend upon bhakti. Śrī Kṛṣṇa concludes this discussion in three verses beginning with the above verse. The compound mad-atmanaḥ means, 'one whose mind (cittam) is fixed on Me.' The word śreyah, 'the ultimate 
1 
tasman mad-bhakti-yuktasya yogino vai mad-atmanah 
na jñānaṁ na ca vairāgyam prayah sreyo bhaved tha 
423 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
good,' means, 'the prescribed method (sadhana) that conduces to the ultimate good."" [Here ends Śrīdhara Svāmi's comment.] 
अत्र प्रायोग्रहणस्यायं भावः - भजतां ज्ञानवैराग्याभ्यासेन प्रयोजनं नास्त्येव । तत्र यथास्थितेऽपि सद्योमुक्तिमार्गे केषाञ्चित् क्रममुक्तिमार्गे प्रवृत्तिर्जायते । तथा "ब्रह्मभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा" (गीता १८।५४) इत्यादिश्रीगीतानुसारेण यदि क्रमभक्तिमार्गे प्रवृत्तिः स्यात् तदा भवत्विति । तदेवं भक्तेः प्रेमलक्षणे सर्वफलराजे स्वफले नास्त्येव ज्ञानाद्यपेक्षा || 
[In Kṛṣṇa's statement, it is said that for a devotee knowledge and renunciation are not "generally" (prayaḥ) conducive to the ultimate good, rather than saying that they are not at all beneficial in this regard.] The reason why the word prayaḥ, "generally," is used is as follows: Those who are engaged in the worship of Bhagavān have no need for the culture of jñāna and vairagya. This is known as the path of immediate liberation (sadyo-mukti). Yet, even among those who are situated on this path, some develop an inclination toward the path of gradual liberation (kramamukti). The path of the gradual unfolding of bhakti through the development of knowledge and detachment is described in the following verse: 
Having realized Brahman, one becomes tranquil and neither grieves nor hankers for anything. Being equally disposed toward all beings, he attains supreme devotion to Me. (GĪTĀ 18.54)2 
According to this statement of the Gita, if someone develops an inclination toward the path of gradual bhakti, he may cultivate jñāna and vairagya. In this manner, bhakti is certainly not dependent on the practices of jñāna and vairagya to deliver its own fruit in the form of divine love (prema) for Bhagavan, the emperor of all fruits. 
2 brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kārkṣati 
samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteşu mad-bhaktim labhate param 
424 
Commentary 
83 Kṛṣṇa Disaffirms Both Jñana and Vairagya 
AT THE BEGINNING of the 20th chapter of the Eleventh Canto, Uddhava says that the distinction between virtue (guna) and defect (dosa) is learnt from the Veda. But he then goes on to say that this distinction is also negated by the Veda. How is this to be understood? In response to Uddhava's observation, Krsna begins to outline the three paths that are directed toward the ultimate good for human beings. The three paths are karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, and bhakti-yoga (SB 11.20.6). First Krsna specifies the criteria of eligibility for each of these paths in three verses (7-9). Then in eight verses, He describes karma-yoga (10-17), and in nine verses, jñāna-yoga (18-26). In the next ten verses, He speaks on bhakti-yoga 
(27-36). 
It may be noted here that by responding to Uddhava's inquiry in this manner, Krsna indicates that virtue and defect are relative terms. What is recognized as virtue at a lower stage of eligibility may be negated as a defect at a higher stage of eligibility. Consequently, by delineation of the three paths, the respective virtues and defects of karma and jñāna are made evident through the disclosure of bhakti's intrinsic preeminent status, which transcends all such categorical distinctions. 
The present verse (SB 11.20.31) belongs to the description of bhakti-yoga. The criterion of eligibility for bhakti is śraddha (SB 11.20.8). Bhakti is not dependent on jñāna or vairāgya. Jñāna here refers to the direct intuition of the distinction between prakṛti and purusa, or in other words, between inert matter and the conscious self. Vairagya means detachment from the objects of sense pleasure. So, when it is said that bhakti is independent of jñāna and vairagya, it means that a devotee has no need to cultivate these capacities separately from bhakti. They are its natural emergent effects. 
According to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmi, jñāna and vairāgya are somewhat conducive to first enter the path of bhakti but should not be considered as actual limbs (angas) of bhakti (BRS 1.2.248). If one endeavors to practice them independent of bhakti, they will harden 
425 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
the practitioner's heart. In his commentary on SB 11.20.31, Śrī Viśvanatha states that jñāna and vairagya practiced independent of bhakti are derivatives of, and hence impelled by, sattva-guna. Being thus rooted in materiality, they too are material and hence unstable. If, however, they ensue as an outcome of nirguṇa-bhakti, they too will be nirguna. Being of such constitution, jñāna will manifest as the direct intuition of Bhagavan, and vairagya will be embodied as the natural distaste for all that does not concern the sevā of Bhagavan, which necessarily includes detachment from sense pleasures. 
It may be noted again in passing that when it is said that bhakti is not dependent on jñana, it does not mean that there is no need of studying sastra. Indeed, it is from the sastra itself that such fundamental truths are learnt. The whole point of studying the sastra in bhakti is to allow for the authentic self-disclosure of Bhagavan through the sabda. This is the intrinsic relationship (sambandha) that exists between the sabda as the illuminator (vācaka) of the Reality and the Reality to be illuminated (väcya), or self-disclosed. Through sustained inquiry into this relation (sambandha), the object of the relation (sambandhi) - Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa-is made 
known. 
This was pointed out in the epistemology section of Tattva Sandarbha, which is the beginning point of Sri Jiva's entire investigation. The whole point of epistemology in bhakti is not merely to provide a valid foundation for the authentication of dialectical truth but to disclose a means of direct truth-seeing. Consequently, to dismiss sastrika study as mere "intellectuality" or excessive concern with knowledge is to miss the whole point of the undertaking and hence to deprive oneself of the direct visioning capacity it is meant to bestow. This is a common yet outright misunderstanding among bhakti practitioners. One must know the meaning of the word jñāna in its appropriate context. 
The present verse (SB 11.20.31) begins with the word tasmat, "therefore," which implies both logical and syntactical connection with the immediately preceding verse, discussed in the previous anuccheda. The sense is that because the concomitant effects 
426 
83 Krsna Disaffirms Both Jñana and Vairagya 
of bhakti described in the previous verse are exactly those with which jñāna and vairagya are concerned, the practitioner of bhakti mentioned in the present verse has no need for the independent culture of jñāna or vairagya. This clearly establishes bhakti's independent nature, since it bestows the fruit of jñana, i.e., freedom from bondage, without its assistance. The implied meaning of the five verses spoken by Śrī Kṛṣṇa (SB 11.20.29-33) is that among the three types of yoga described by Him, bhakti is preeminent. Thus, bhakti is shown to be the abhidheya, and not jñāna or karma. 
In this verse, the value of jñāna and vairagya is not categorically denied. Rather, it is said that they are not "generally" conducive to the ultimate good for a bhakta. Śrī Jīva comments that the word "generally" is used to account for those bhakti-yogis who, though engaged in the worship of Bhagavan, are yet inclined to the path of gradual liberation through jñāna and vairagya. On the path of pure, unmixed devotion, there is absolutely no other inclination but to engage in pleasing service to Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Devotees established in such devotion have no interest in any type of occult experiences whether of the material or spiritual spheres. Their sole interest is the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. 
On the other hand, there are some devotees who are drawn to the immediate cognition of Brahman, which is nothing other than the unqualified self-disclosure (nirviseṣa-avirbhāva) of Bhagavan in which He Himself remains concealed. Such devotees of mixed intent take to the path of bhakti combined with jñāna. It is to include them that Kṛṣṇa uses the word prayaḥ, "generally." Those devotees, however, who adhere to the path of pure bhakti have absolutely no need of the practices of jñāna or vairāgya. 
In the concluding pair of verses from the group of five cited by Śrī Jiva (SB 11.20.29-33), Kṛṣṇa asserts that bhakti can grant any of the results aimed at by any other process. 
427 
