+++
title = "092"
+++
Bhakti Is the Essential Teaching throughout Śrīmad Bhāgavata 
९२ । तदेवमस्मिन् श्रीमति महापुराणे गुरुशिष्यभावेन प्रवृत्तानामुपदेशशिक्षावाक्येषु भक्तेरेवाभिधेयत्वं साधितम् । तथा ( भा० १।१६।६ ) - 
— 
THUS, in this beautiful Mahāpurāṇa, in the statements of both tutelage and apprenticeship that are exchanged in the relation between teacher and student, bhakti alone has been established as the abhidheya, or the prescribed means of ultimate attainment. This is again indicated in the following verse: 
तत् कथ्यतां महाभाग यदि कृष्णकथाश्रयम् । अथवास्य पदाम्भोजमकरन्दलिहां सताम् ॥ १५९ ॥ 
O greatly fortunate one [Sūta Gosvāmi], please narrate these incidents if they pertain to Bhagavan Krsna or His devotees, who lick the honey from His lotus feet. (SB 1.16.6)1 
इत्यनुसारेण सर्वेषामितिहासानामपि तन्मात्रतात्पर्यत्वं ज्ञेयम् । विस्तरभिया तु न विव्रियते । अथान्यत्र च तदेव दृश्यते । तत्रान्वयेन यथा ( भा० ६।३।२२) - 
According to this verse, the import of all the accounts found throughout Srimad Bhagavata is understood to be concerned with this subject alone [i.e., Bhagavan and His devotees, because all discussions are narrated in response to the above request]. 
1 
tat kathyatām mahabhaga yadi kṛṣṇa-kathāśrayam 
athavasya padambhoja-makaranda-lihām satam 
471I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
As this topic alone would extensively increase the size of this book, I will not elaborate on it. 
The point that bhakti alone is the abhidheya in Śrimad Bhāgavata is evidenced in other dialogues as well. In this regard, we will now examine a number of verses where this is pointed out by anvaya, or positive concomitance. Yama informed his servants: 
एतावानेव लोकेऽस्मिन् पुंसां धर्मः परः स्मृतः । भक्तियोगो भगवति तन्नामग्रहणादिभिः ।। १६० ॥ 
In this world, this alone is asserted to be the supreme essential duty (para-dharma) of humanity, namely, to engage in bhaktiyoga to Bhagavan by uttering His names and other such direct acts of devotion. (SB 6.3.22)2 
पुंसां जीवमात्राणां परो धर्मः सार्वभौमो धर्म एतावानेव स्मृतः । नैतदधिकः । एतावत्त्वमेवाह–तन्नामग्रहणादिभिर्यो भक्तियोगः साक्षाद् भक्तिरिति । एवकारेणान्यव्यावृत्तत्वं स्पष्टयति – भगवतीति । नामग्रहणादीन्यपि यदि कर्मादौ तत्सागुण्याद्यर्थं प्रयुज्यन्ते तदा तस्य परत्वं नास्ति । तुच्छफलार्थं प्रयुक्तत्वेन तदपराधादित्यर्थः । तथैव क्षयिष्णुफलदातृत्वं च भवतीति भावः ॥ श्रीयमः स्वभटान् ॥ 
The word puṁsām, "of humanity," means, "of all living beings" (jīva-mātrāṇām), and para-dharmaḥ, "the supreme essential duty," means, "the universal duty" (sarvabhauma-dharmaḥ). The clause, "this limit, or extent (etāvān), has been asserted (smrtah) as the supreme essential duty of humanity," indicates that there is no higher dharma beyond this. The para-dharmaḥ being referred to by the words etävän eva, "this extent alone," is direct (sākṣāt) bhakti-yoga, consisting of devotional acts such as uttering the names of Bhagavan. By the emphatic particle eva, "only," used to qualify the pronoun etävän, "this extent," Yama denies the possibility of any other dharma being admitted as supreme. He clarifies this by the word bhagavati, "to Bhagavan." [In other words, the supreme dharma involves those devotional acts that are meant exclusively for the pleasure of Bhagavan.] 
2 
etävän eva loke'smin pumsam dharmah parah smṛtah bhakti-yogo bhagavati tan-nama-grahaṇādibhiḥ 
472 
92 Bhakti Is the Essential Teaching throughout Srimad Bhagavata 
If the uttering of Bhagavan's names and the other acts of devotion are applied in regard to karma, [jñāna,] or other practices, in order to bring them to fruition, they can no longer be considered as supreme (para). Rather, when these acts are applied in this way, it is considered an offense to bhakti, because they are then utilized in pursuit of insignificant fruits. In such a case, these devotional practices are relegated to the bestowal of ephemeral fruits. This is the import. 
Commentary 
THE THREE principal topics of discussion in the Six Sandarbhas are sambandha, "a discursive analysis of the Reality denoted by the text of Srimad Bhāgavata," abhidheya, "the means of attainment of that Reality," and prayojana, "the end state to be attained in regard to that Reality." The topic of sambandha was examined in great detail in the first four volumes. The present book, Bhakti Sandarbha, is concerned with an exposition of the means (abhidheya). In the first volume, Tattva Sandarbha, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī first dealt with the topic of epistemology (pramāna), establishing Śrimad Bhagavata as the supreme authority for deriving valid conclusions regarding the three primary topics with which the anthology is concerned. 
On this foundation, Śrī Jiva began in this book to analyze the dialogues between the principal teachers and students described in Śrimad Bhāgavata in order to objectively ascertain the abhidheya. In doing so, he surveyed the entire book, canto by canto, beginning with the first. The unmistakable conclusion made evident through this investigation is that all the major teachers, who are renowned sages within the Puranic tradition, recommend bhakti as the abhidheya. 
Śrī Jiva undertook this elaborate study, which is continued in the upcoming anucchedas, because before his time most of the earlier scholars and philosophers across the spectrum of Indian religion thought of bhakti only as a means to mukti. This view is still prevalent. Even among the Vaisnava Schools, there are many who consider bhakti primarily as a means to attain mukti in the form of 
473 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
eternal residence in the transphenomenal abode of Vaikuntha. As a consequence of this predetermined bias in view, it was exceedingly rare for someone to recognize bhakti as an end unto itself. To uproot this misconception and to establish bhakti in its own right, Śrī Jiva initiated an extensive analysis of Srimad Bhagavata, the supreme pramāņa, or authority, in the matter of the self-disclosure of Ultimate Reality as Bhagavan. 
A list of the significant dialogues examined up to this point in the text is given below: 
1. Suta Gosvāmi offers instruction to Sage Saunaka in 
Anucchedas 3-22. 
2. Śrī Narada instructs Vyasa in Anuccheda 23. 
3. Sri Suka instructs King Parīkṣit in Anucchedas 24-32. 
4. Śrī Saunaka responds to Suta's teachings in Anucchedas 33-40. 5. Brahma instructs Narada in Anucchedas 41-42. 
6. Vidura inquires from Maitreya in Anuccheda 43- 
7. Maitreya cites the prayers of the devas known as Aja and Anaja 
to Kāranodakaśayi Viṣṇu in Anuccheda 44. 
8. Maitreya addresses Vidura in Anuccheda 45. 
9. Bhagavan Kapila instructs Devahuti in Anucchedas 46-47. 10. Sanat-kumāra instructs King Prthu in Anuccheda 48. 
11. Maitreya instructs Vidura in Anuccheda 49. 
12. Rudra instructs the Pracetas in Anuccheda 50. 
13. Narada instructs the Pracetas in Anucchedas 51-52. 
14. Rṣabhadeva instructs His sons in Anuccheda 53. 
15. Jada Bharata instructs King Rahugana in Anuccheda 53. 
16. Rahugana responds to Jada Bharata in Anuccheda 54. 
17. Bhagavan Sankarṣaṇa instructs King Citraketu in Anuccheda 55. 18. Prahlada instructs his classmates in Anucchedas 55-57. 
19. Nārada instructs King Yudhisthira in Anuccheda 58. 
20. The Nava-yogendras instruct King Nimi in Anucchedas 59-65. 21. Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructs Uddhava in Anucchedas 66-85. 
22. Śrī Suka instructs King Parikṣit in Anuccheda 86. 23. Śrī Sūta instructs Saunaka in Anucchedas 87-91. 
In this analysis, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī did not refer to the Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth Cantos of Srimad Bhagavata. In this regard, he did not want to further extend the scope of the book, as he mentions in 
474 
92 Bhakti Is the Essential Teaching throughout Srimad Bhagavata 
this anuccheda. In summing up this survey of the major dialogues between teacher and student, Śrī Jīva cites a verse spoken by Saunaka in which the latter requests Sūta Gosvāmī to relate the story of Kali's chastisement by King Parikṣit. In making this request, however, he stipulates that he is interested to hear only if the narration is related to Krsna or His devotees. This suggests that not only this specific episode but all the other stories recounted by Suta Gosvāmī would be required to meet this same criterion; otherwise, his audience would become indifferent to his speech. From this guiding principle, it is concluded that because the entire Bhāgavata is concerned with nothing other than the accounts pertaining to Kṛṣṇa and His devotees, its purpose is clearly devotion to Bhagavan Śrī 
Krsna. 
After concluding this extensive analysis of the message of the Bhāgavata's preeminent teachers, Śrī Jīva refers to other dialogues, such as that of Yamarāja to his servants, in which bhakti is again identified as the abhidheya. In the verse cited here (SB 6.3.22), the indeclinable emphatic particle eva, "only," is highly significant. Its function in Yamaraja's statement is to exclude anything other than bhakti to Bhagavan as the supreme essential duty (para-dharma) for all human beings (pumsām). 
Śrī Jīva remarks that if bhakti in the form of uttering the names of Bhagavan is applied in regard to practices such as karma, then such bhakti cannot be classified as para-dharma, because in this case, bhakti would be relegated to an inferior purpose. Indeed, such a secondary application of bhakti is not pleasing to Bhakti Devi. As a consequence, she would award only the results of karma, which are temporary, but not the eternal fruit of prema for Bhagavan. 
3 
The indeclinable eva can have three different applications: (1) specifying the object itself, anya-yoga-vyavaccheda, in which case its function is to exclude any other object from the reference in question; (2) specifying the object's qualifier, ayoga-vyavaccheda, in which case it excludes the non-application of the qualifier to the object in question; and (3) specifying the action of the verb as it applies to the object, atyanta-ayoga-vyavaccheda, in which case it excludes the possibility of the non-application of the verb's action to the object in question (Kiranavali commentary on Nyāya-siddhānta-muktāvalī, p. 299). In the present verse (SB 6.3.22), Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi takes the first meaning of eva, specifying that nothing other than this limit (etävän eva) can be the para-dharma. 
475 
476 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
In the upcoming anucchedas, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi continues to cite other positive affirmations (anvaya) of bhakti as the abhidheya. 
