+++
title = "101"
+++
The Worthlessness of Vedic Karma 
Devoid of Bhakti — II 

१०१ । अत एवाहुः (भा० १० | २३ | ३९ ) - 
THEREFORE, the yājnika-brāhmaṇas repented: 
धिग् जन्म नस्त्रिवृद् यत्तद् धिग् व्रतं धिग् बहुज्ञताम् । धिक् कुलं धिक् क्रियादाक्ष्यं विमुखा ये त्वधोक्षजे ॥ १८९ ॥ 
Shame upon our three auspicious births, shame upon our vows, and shame upon our extensive learning! Shame upon our noble heritage, and shame upon our proficiency in performing rituals, for we have diverted our attention away from Bhagavan Adhokṣaja. (SB 10.23.39)1 
टीका च - "त्रिवृत् शौक्रं सावित्रं दैक्षमिति त्रिगुणितं जन्म । व्रतं ब्रह्मचर्यम् । क्रियाः कर्माणि दाक्ष्यं च ” इत्यादिका । 
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments: "The words trivṛt janma mean 'three types of birth,' namely, śaukra, 'seminal,' savitra, 'initiation into the chanting of the sävitri-mantra and being invested with the sacred thread,' and daikṣam [or yājnika], 'initiation into the performance of Vedic sacrifice.' The word vrata means 'the vow of celibacy' (brahmacaryam), and kriyā-dākṣyam means 'dexterity in the execution of ritual or sacrificial acts."" [Here ends Śrīdhara Svāmi's comment.] 
1 
dhig janma nas trivṛd yat tad dhig vratam dhig bahu-jñatām dhik kulam dhik kriya-daksyam vimukha ye tv adhoksaje 
521I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
तथोक्तम् “किं जन्मभिस्त्रिभिः” (भा० ४।३१।१०) इत्यादि ॥ याज्ञिकविप्राः ॥ 
A similar statement was made by Śrī Nārada: 

What is the value of a human being's three births in this world — śaukra (seminal), săvitra (initiation into the chanting of the săvitri-mantra and being invested with the sacred thread), and yajnika (initiation into the performance of Vedic sacrifice)? What is the use of the ritual acts prescribed by the three Vedas? Of what value even is a lifespan as long as that of the gods? What is the point of hearing the Vedas, of asceticism, eloquence of speech, focused mental attention, acute intelligence, power, sensual dexterity, yoga, sankhya, mendicancy, study of the Vedas, and other auspicious practices, if by these Bhagavan Hari is not self-disclosed as the revealer of the Self (atma-pradaḥ)? (SB 4.31.10-12)2 
Commentary 
ŚRI JIVA GOSVĀMĪ continues to stress the singular importance of bhakti and the futility of all other practices if devoid of bhakti. Bhakti is comparable to the ātmā itself, and all other practices are akin to the physical body. Just as the physical body is worthless without the presence of the ātmā, so too all other processes and paths are impotent without bhakti. 
The principal verse of this anuccheda (SB 10.23.39) is spoken by the brahmanas of Mathura, who had assembled near Vṛndāvana to perform a yajña. Meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa was tending the cows nearby along with His friends. In the midst of their play, Kṛṣṇa's friends suddenly became overwhelmed with hunger and requested Kṛṣṇa to arrange for some food. Krsna directed them to the brahmanas, who were engaged in their yajña nearby. When, however, the 
2 
kim janmabhis tribhir veha saukra-savitra-yajnikaiḥ karmabhir vă trayi-proktaiḥ pumso'pi vibudhayuṣā srutena tapasā vā kim vacobhiś citta-vrttibhih buddhyā vā kim nipunaya balenendriya-rādhasă kim va yogena sānkhyena nyasa-svädhyāyayor api kim va sreyobhir anyais ca na yatratma-prado harih 
522 
101 The Worthlessness of Vedic Karma Devoid of Bhakti - II 
brāhmaṇas were approached by the boys, they would not give them any food, not wanting to be diverted from their rituals. So the boys returned without success. Krsna then advised them to approach the wives of the very same brahmanas. When the boys went to the wives and asked for food, the wives were delighted. They personally carried sumptuous offerings of cooked preparations to Kṛṣṇa and fed everyone. At this point, the brahmanas realized their mistake by the grace of their wives. They spoke the present verse while repenting for not having served Kṛṣṇa and His friends when they first had the chance. 
After demonstrating the futility of karma devoid of bhakti, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi next explains that even karma offered to Bhagavan is inferior to pure bhakti. 
523 
