+++
title = "115"
+++
The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
115.1 
The Abhidheyatva of Bhakti As a Primary Topic of Śrīmad Bhāgavata 
११५ । इयमेव भक्तिः “धर्मः प्रोज्झितकैतवोऽत्र परमो निर्मत्सराणां सताम् " ( भा० १।१।२) इत्यत्रोक्ता । “अत्र सर्गो विसर्गश्च" ( भा० २।१०।१) इत्यादौ दशलक्षण्यामपि "सद्धर्मः " ( भा० २११०।४) इत्येकलक्षणत्वेनोक्ता । 
IT IS THIS very bhakti that is referred to [as parama-dharma] in the following statement: "In this Srimad Bhagavata, the supreme essential duty (parama-dharma) of those who are free from envy and established in the state of authentic being is disclosed, utterly devoid of all deception" (SB 1.1.2)! Bhakti, specified as sad-dharma, or "the path of authentic religion" (in SB 2.10.4) is also included as one of the ten primary topics of Śrimad Bhagavata, enumerated in SB 2.10.12 
1 
2 
dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo tra paramo nirmatsarāṇām satām 
atra sargo visargas ca sthanam posanam ūtayaḥ 
manvantaresanukatha nirodho muktir asrayaḥ 
In this list of ten topics from SB 2.10.1, the sixth, namely, manvantara, is concerned with sad-dharma, or "the path of authentic religion," as illustrated three verses later in SB 2.10.4. Śrī Jiva comments that the term sad-dharma, mentioned in the latter verse, refers to bhakti, thus establishing bhakti as one of the ten primary topics of Srimad Bhagavata. This point is elaborated further in the commentary. 
664 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
Commentary 
UP TO THE previous anuccheda, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī established bhakti as the abhidheya by an analysis of the statements of the primary teachers throughout Srimad Bhagavata, both from the perspective of affirmation and negation. He also showed the inadequacy of devotion that is directed not to Bhagavan but to the devas instead. Bhakti was also demonstrated as the abhidheya by the lack of regard expressed for other paths. Śrī Jīva then established that bhakti is an eternal path. It is not given up even after attaining the perfected state of prema. In the previous anuccheda, Śrī Jiva analyzed the import of Srimad Bhagavata from the six hermeneutical criteria known as şad-linga. From this perspective as well, bhakti is validated as the abhidheya. This is the universally concordant view of all scriptures, gati-sāmānya. 
Now, in this anuccheda, Śrī Jīva shows that bhakti is the abhidheya implicit in the very design of Srimad Bhāgavata. In the beginning of an educational text or scripture, the author elaborates four topics, called anubandha-catuṣṭaya, one of which is the abhidheya, or "the prescribed means of attaining the subject under study in the book." According to Purva-mīmāmsā, there are five types of statements found in the Vedas, namely, vidhi (injunctions), nişedha (prohibitions), mantra (hymns), nämadheya (names of sacrifices), and arthavada (commendatory passages). Among these five, the vidhi statements are primary, whereas the remaining four are subsidiary to and supportive of the injunctions. Any statement other than a vidhi must be applied to a vidhi. The purpose of the Vedas is to delineate dharma, which is in the form of an injunction (codana-lakṣano'rtho dharmaḥ, Jaimini-sutra 1.1.2). Therefore, abhidheya, or "the prescribed means," which is synonymous with dharma and vidhi, is the most important of the four topics specified in the opening portion of a book. 
The abhidheya is referred to in the second verse of the Bhāgavata as parama-dharma, "the supreme essential duty." This paramadharma is nothing but bhakti, as evidenced from the discussion of verses such as this: 
665 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
That alone is humanity's supreme essential duty (para-dharma) by which causeless, unobstructed bhakti to Adhokṣaja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, can come into being, as a consequence of which the self is completely fulfilled. (SB 1.2.6)3 
Apart from bhakti's being specified as the abhidheya in the book's introduction, it is also included in the ten primary topics of Srimad Bhāgavata. Sukadeva, the principal speaker of the Bhāgavata, points out that the book consists of ten topics (SB 2.10.1). The sixth of these is manvantara, or "the religious path enacted by the Manus." Of all the ten topics, this is the one that is directly concerned with abhidheya, or the means of attainment. To make this all the more evident, Sukadeva then defines the word manvantara as sad-dharma, "the path of authentic religion," three verses later (SB 2.10.4). 
A manvantara consists of one-fourteenth part of a day of Brahma. The management of the lower realm of the universe changes in each manvantara. The purpose of this system is to propagate and maintain sad-dharma, which is synonymous with the term parama-dharma, or bhakti. This is summed up in the following statement: "The topic of manvantara is concerned with the path of authentic religion (sad-dharma) [or the religious path (dharma) of those established in authentic being (sat)]" (manvantarāni sad-dharma, SB 2.10.4). 
This sad-dharma is none other than bhakti. Thus, bhakti is also established as the abhidheya by its inclusion within the ten primary topics of Śrīmad Bhagavata. This is also confirmed by Sūta Gosvāmī, the speaker, while providing a summary of the complete book in the second to last chapter. Therein, he says that bhakti-yoga has been described elaborately throughout this book (SB 12.12.5). 
3 
sa vai pumsām paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje ahaituky apratihata yayātmā suprasīdati 
See Anuccheda 3. 
666 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
115.2 
The Abhidheyatva of Bhakti in the Catuḥ-śloki 
तस्या अभिधेयत्वं श्रीभागवतबीजरूपायां चतुःश्लोक्यामप्युदाहृतम् (भा० २।९।३५) - 
Bhakti is demonstrated to be the abhidheya of Srimad Bhagavata in the book's four seed verses (catuḥ-sloki) as well [SB 2.9.3235]. [Bhakti is specifically indicated in the final verse from this group:] 
एतावदेव जिज्ञास्यं तत्त्वजिज्ञासुनात्मनः । 
अन्वयव्यतिरेकाभ्यां यत् स्यात् सर्वत्र सर्वदा ॥ २९५ ॥ इत्यादि । 
This alone [etavad eva, i.e., sadhana-bhakti], which is encountered everywhere (sarvatra) and at all times (sarvadā) and which is established both through affirmation (anvaya) and negation (vyatireka), should be inquired into (jijñāsyam) by one who is inquisitive to realize the truth of the Self [i.e., the mystery (rahasya) of prema for the Self, Bhagavan]. (SB 2.9.35)* 
पूर्वं हि ज्ञानविज्ञानरहस्यतदङ्गानि वक्तव्यत्वेन चत्वार्येव प्रतिज्ञातानि । तत्र चतुःश्लोक्याः प्राक्तनास्त्रयोऽर्था अपि भगवत्सन्दर्भे (अनु० ९६) क्रमेणैव प्राक्तनश्लोकत्रये व्याख्याताः । रहस्यशब्देन तत्र प्रेमभक्तिः । तदङ्गशब्देन साधनभक्तिरुच्यते । टीका च "रहस्यं भक्तिस्तदङ्गं साधनम्” इत्येषा । 
Prior to and by way of introduction to these four seed verses, Bhagavan declared that He would expound only four topics - transcendental knowledge of the Absolute (jñāna); immediate realization of the same Truth (vijñāna); the confidential mystery [of prema for the Absolute as Bhagavan] (rahasya); and its intrinsic part [in the form of sadhana-bhakti] (tad-anga) [SB 2.9.30]. Of these four topics, the first three were described respectively in the first three verses of the catuḥ-sloki, as explained in Bhagavat Sandarbha (Anuccheda 96). In this context, the word rahasya, "the confidential mystery," refers to prema-bhakti, or devotion in the perfectional stage of divine 
etavad eva jijñāsyam tattva-jijñāsunātmanaḥ anvaya-vyatirekābhyam yat syat sarvatra sarvadā 
667 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
love, while tad-anga, "the intrinsic part of that mystery," refers to sadhana-bhakti, or devotion in the stage of practice. Śrīdhara Svāmi also confirms the same in his commentary: "The word rahasyam means 'bhakti,' and tad-anga means 'sadhana,' or devotion in the stage of practice." 
ततः क्रमप्राप्तत्वेन (भा० ११ | १४ | ३ ) - 
कालेन नष्टा प्रलये वाणीयं वेदसञ्ज्ञिता । 
मयादौ ब्रह्मणे प्रोक्ता धर्मो यस्यां मदात्मकः ॥ २९६ ॥ 
इति भगवद्वाक्यानुसारेण च चतुर्थेऽस्मिन् पद्ये साधनभक्तिरेव व्याख्याता । 
Thus, according to the order of the topics discussed in the catuḥśloki, and according to Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa's statement cited hereafter, it is specifically sadhana-bhakti that is elaborated in the fourth seed verse quoted above [SB 2.9.35]: 
In due course of time, this speech of Mine, known as the Veda, remained undisclosed during the period of dissolution. In it, the dharma that is entailed is constituted of the very essence of My Being (mad-atmakaḥ). It was spoken by Me once again to Brahma at the beginning of a new evolutionary cycle. (SB 11.14.3) 
अत्र च पुनर्व्याख्याविवरणायोत्थाप्यते । तथा हिआत्मनो मम भगवतः । तत्त्वजिज्ञासुना प्रेमरूपं रहस्यमनुभवितुमिच्छुना । एतावन्मात्रमेव जिज्ञासितव्यं श्रीगुरुचरणेभ्यः शिक्षणीयम् । किं तत् ? यदेकमेव अन्वयेन विधिमुखेन व्यतिरेकेण निषेधमुखेन च स्यादुपपद्यते । 
We are examining this verse [SB 2.9.35] again here in order to expand on the explanation [given previously in Bhagavat 
> The footnote to SB 11.14.3 in Anuccheda 76 may be referred to here for an 
explanation of the words mad-atmakah dharmah. As in SB 2.9.35, also spoken by Krsna, this expression is another veiled reference to bhakti, being the functional essence (atmakah) of Bhagavan's intrinsic potency (svarupa-sakti), predominated by hladini. 
⚫ kalena naṣṭā pralaye vaniyam veda-sanjnitā 
mayadau brahmane prokta dharmo yasyam mad-atmakaḥ 
668 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
Sandarbha, Anuccheda 96]? The word atmanaḥ, "of the Self," means, "of Me, Bhagavan." The compound tattva-jijñāsunā, “by one who is inquisitive to realize the truth of the Self," means, "by one who aspires to experience directly the mystery of divine love" [for Bhagavan]. The phrase etavad eva jijñāsyam, "this alone should be inquired into," means that this topic alone is worthy of being learned from an authentic spiritual preceptor (Śrī Guru). And what is that? The one [method, i.e., sädhanabhakti], which is encountered (syat, i.e., upapadyate) [everywhere (sarvatra) and always (sarvada)] and which is established both "by affirmation" (anvayena), meaning "by direct injunction" (vidhi-mukhena), and "by negation" (vyatirekeṇa), meaning "by prohibition." 
7 
8 
In Bhagavat Sandarbha, in the beginning of Anuccheda 96, Jiva Gosvāmi states that the two words rahasya and tad-anga will be explained later on (agre vyanjayiṣyate), meaning here in Bhakti Sandarbha. His statement in this regard is as follows: "This confidential mystery (rahasya) is unalloyed devotion in unconditional love (prema-bhakti), as will be elaborated later on. [Krsna continues:] 'Moreover, embrace also its intrinsic part (tad-anga).' This [i.e., jñāna alone], however, will not quickly disclose immediate realization (vijñāna) and the mystery of divine love (rahasya) if obstructed by offenses (aparadha). Therefore, you should also embrace [the intrinsic part of the mystery], which supports the unfolding of that knowledge. This is the sense. This intrinsic part is in the form of sadhana-bhakti, characterized by devotional acts such as hearing and so on. This topic will be elaborated later on" (tac ca [rahasyam] prema-bhakti-rupam ity agre vyanjayisyate. tatha tad-argam ca grhana. tac ca sati tv aparādhākhya-vighne na jhatiti vijñāna-rahasye prakatṭayet. tasmat tasya jñānasya sahayam ca gṛhanety arthah. tac ca śravanadi-bhakti-rupam ity agre vyanjayisyate). 
In Jiva Gosvāmi's statement here, the words sarvatra sarvadă, "everywhere and at all times," have been omitted. However, in a nearly identical gloss on the second line of SB 2.9.35 given in Bhagavat Sandarbha (Anuccheda 96), he includes the words sada sarvatra, "always and everywhere," as part of his elucidation. Borrowing from this statement, we have included these words in the above explanation to complete the sense of the second line of the verse. 
669 
Commentary 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
After pointing out that bhakti is specified as the abhidheya in the second of the Bhāgavata's opening verses as well as in the ten primary topics discussed in the text, Śri Jiva Gosvāmi now refers to the Bhāgavata's four seed verses. These verses are the basis of the entire Śrīmad Bhagavata. The book as a whole is an elaboration of the core ideas contained in these four verses. The first three verses were explained in Bhagavat Sandarbha (Anuccheda 96). Now, in this anuccheda of Bhakti Sandarbha, Śrī Jīva analyzes the last of the four seed verses. 
These verses were spoken by Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Brahma. In one of the two lead-in verses to the catuḥ-sloki, Krsna informs Brahma that He will speak to him of four items, namely, jñāna, vijñāna, rahasya, and its anga. These then are the subjects of the four verses of the catuḥ-sloki, specified as follows: 
Receive this most confidential knowledge regarding Me (jñāna), which includes its immediate realization (vijñāna), along with its mystery (rahasya), and the intrinsic part of that mystery (tad-anga), as enunciated by Me. (SB 2.9.30)9 
The word jñāna is understood here to mean transcendental knowledge pertaining to Bhagavan, or in other words, knowledge of Bhagavan that is disclosed through and as revealed speech. The word vijñāna signifies a deeper direct form of cognition of Bhagavan through immediate intuition. The word rahasya, "the mystery," implies that even in the immediate intuition of Bhagavan, there is something even more confidential that yet remains concealed. This refers to the state of divine love (prema), which is awareness laden with transcendental affect. The whole point of immediate realization culminates in the state of prema. Finally, the compound tadanga, "the intrinsic part of that," or in other words, "the intrinsic part of the mystery of prema," refers to sadhana-bhakti, the means by which the rahasya of prema is self-disclosed to the practitioner. 
9 
jnanam parama-guhyam me yad vijñāna-samanvitam sa-rahasyam tad-angam ca grhana gaditam maya 
670 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
The fourth item above (tad-anga, i.e., sadhana-bhakti) is spoken of in the fourth verse of the catuh-sloki (SB 2.9.35), which is the subject of discussion throughout the remainder of this anuccheda. Śrī Kṛṣṇa declares that this alone (etavad eva) is to be studied or inquired into (jijñāsyam). From this statement, it is clearly evident that bhakti is established as the abhidheya in the catuh-sloki. Kṛṣṇa reconfirms the same conclusion in SB 11.14.3, stating that the Vedas are concerned only with that dharma which is constituted of the very essence of His Being (mad-atmaka-dharma), which is bhakti alone. In the fourth seed verse, Krsna indicates bhakti's universality as the means by saying that it is encountered everywhere and at all times (sarvatra sarvadā syāt), and that it is established in śāstra both by affirmation and negation (anvaya-vyatirekabhyam). In the ongoing discussion, Śrī Jīva will elaborate on the significance of 
these words. 
115.3 
Bhakti Established by Affirmation and Negation 
तत्रान्वयेन यथा " एतावानेव लोकेऽस्मिन्" (भा० ७।७।५५) इत्यादि । 
In this connection, bhakti is established as the abhidheya by affirmation (anvaya), as in the following statements: 
Unalloyed devotion (ekānta-bhakti) to Bhagavan Govinda by which the direct vision of Him is immediately self-disclosed in everything - this alone has been recognized as the ultimate good for human beings in this world. (SB 7.7.55)10 
“मन्मना भव मद्भक्तः” (गीता ९।३४) इत्यादि च । 
10 
etävän eva loke'smin pursaḥ svarthaḥ parah smṛtah 
ekanta-bhaktir govinde yat sarvatra tad-ikṣaṇam 
There are in fact three verses in the Bhāgavata that begin with this same first line, all with roughly the same import, i.e., direct instructions to engage in bhakti. The other instances are SB 3.25.44 and SB 6.3.22, discussed earlier in Anucchedas 47 and 92, respectively. Note the use of the words etävän eva, "this alone," which are also found in the catuḥ-sloki verse under discussion. 
671I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
Also in the Gitā: “Fix your mind on Me, become My devotee, worship Me, and bow down to Me” (GITĀ 9.34 and 18.65). " 
व्यतिरेकेण यथा ( भा० ११।५।२-३ ) - 
Bhakti is also established as the abhidheya through negation (vyatireka), as in the following statements: 
मुखबाहूरुपादेभ्यः पुरुषस्याश्रमैः सह । 
चत्वारो जज्ञिरे वर्णा गुणैर्विप्रादयः पृथक् ॥ २९७ ॥ 
य एषां पुरुषं साक्षादात्मप्रभवमीश्वरम् । 
न भजन्त्यवजानन्ति स्थानाद् भ्रष्टाः पतन्त्यधः ।। २९८ ।। 
From the mouth, arms, thighs, and feet of the Puruşa appeared the four respective vocational classifications (varnas) along with the four stages of life (asramas). The varnas were distinctively divided into vipra, ksatriya, vaisya, and sudra according to the corresponding gunas that determine their natures. Among human beings belonging to these divisions, those who [naively] neglect to worship the Puruşa, who is directly the primordial ground of being of all individual beings (atmaprabhavam) and the Supreme Immanent Regulator of all being (Iśvara), or who show Him contempt, are deprived of their status and fall into degradation. (SB 11.5.2 - 3 ) 12 
“न मां दुष्कृतिनो मूढाः” (गीता ७ । १५ ) इत्यादि । 
यावज् जनो भजति नो भुवि विष्णुभक्तिवार्तासुधारसमशेषरसैकसारम् । तावज् जरामरणजन्मशताभिघातदुःखानि तानि लभते बहुदेहजानि ॥ २९९ ॥ 
इति पद्मपुराणे च । 
Also in the Gitā: 
11 
Those who are utterly bereft of discrimination, those who are the lowest of men, those whose wisdom has been carried 
man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru 
12 mukha-bahurupādebhyah purusasyāśramaih saha 
catvāro jajnire varna gunair vipradayah prthak 
ya eṣām puruṣaṁ sākṣad atma-prabhavam isvaram na bhajanty avajananti sthānād bhraṣṭaḥ patanty adhah 
672 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
away by maya, and those who have embraced the secularistall such performers of unmeritorious 
materialistic nature 
― 
acts do not take refuge in Me. (GĪTĀ 7.15)13 
And in the Padma Purāna: 
On earth, as long as a person does not partake of the ambrosial elixir of the narrations of Visnu-bhakti, which is the singular essence of all aesthetic relish, he is subjected to hundreds of attacks of pain in the form of birth, death, and old age proceeding from innumerable bodies. (Padma Purāṇa, Pātāla-khanda 85.33)14 
Commentary 
Here, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi continues to analyze the fourth seed verse of the catuh-sloki, which is concerned with sadhana-bhakti as the abhidheya, or the means of attaining the mystery of prema. In Kṛṣṇa's statement, that which is to be inquired into (i.e., the abhidheya) is said to be established in scripture both by affirmation (anvaya) and by negation (vyatireka). In this subsection of Anuccheda 115, Śrī Jiva first cites two verses as examples of bhakti being established through affirmation. In the first of these (SB 7.7.55), ekanta-bhakti, or "unalloyed devotion," is directly stated to be the sole means to the ultimate good and that by which the immediate vision of Bhagavan is disclosed. In the second verse (GĪTĀ 9.34 and 18.65), Kṛṣṇa gives an unequivocal instruction to engage in bhakti. 
Śrī Jīva then cites three verses establishing bhakti as the abhidheya through negation. All three of these verses show the defect of the non-performance of bhakti. It is to be noted that in SB 11.5.3, cited above, sage Camasa informs King Nimi that neglecting to worship Isvara is itself contemptuous and the cause of one's degradation. Kṛṣṇa refers to all such people as duskṛtina, or "performers 
13 
14 
na mām duskṛtino mudhah prapadyante narādhamah mayayapahṛta-jñana asuram bhavam āśritāḥ 
yāvaj-jano bhajati na bhuvi visņu-bhakti-vartta-sudha-rasam aseṣa-rasaika-säram tāvaj-jarā-maraṇa-janma-satābhighāta-duḥkhāni tāni labhate bahu-deha-jāni 
673 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
of unmeritorious acts" (GĪTĀ 7.15). This means that if one neglects to worship Bhagavan, he is engaged in unmeritorious deeds, even if his actions are otherwise accepted as virtuous by society in general. Prahlada has also declared that nondevotees are devoid of illustrious or divine qualities (SB 5.18.12). Their so-called admirable qualities are congenial only in a relative sense. When viewed from the perspective of life's ultimate purpose, they are not meritorious at all. In the next subsection, Śrī Jīva will elaborate on the meaning of bhakti's being encountered "everywhere" (sarvatra). 
115.4 
Bhakti Is Encountered Everywhere 
कुत्र कुत्रोपपद्यते ? सर्वत्र शास्त्रकर्तृदेशकरणद्रव्यक्रियाकार्यफलेषु समस्तेष्वेव । 
Where is bhakti encountered (upapadyate)? "Everywhere" (sarvatra) - in all (1) scriptures (sastra), (2) performers or agents of action (karty), (3) places (desa), (4) senses (karana), (5) objects (dravya), (6) actions (kriya), (7) prescribed duties (kārya), and (8) results (phala). [We will now examine examples of each of these in sequence.] 
(१) तत्र समस्तशास्त्रेषु यथा स्कान्दे ब्रह्मनारदसंवादे - 
(1) Bhakti is established as the abhidheya in all scriptures (sarvaśāstra), as stated in the Skanda Purana in a dialogue between Brahma and Narada: 
संसारेऽस्मिन् महाघोरे जन्ममृत्युसमाकुले । 
पूजनं वासुदेवस्य तारकं वादिभिः स्मृतम् ॥ ३०० ॥ 
The worship of Bhagavan Vasudeva has been declared by the proponents of various scriptures as the means of deliverance in this terrifying material world, which is beset with birth and death. (Skanda Purāṇa)15 
15 samsăre'smin mahāghore janma-mṛtyu-samākule 
püjanam vasudevasya tarakam vadibhih smṛtam 
674 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
तत्राप्यन्वयेन यथा “भगवान् ब्रह्म कार्त्स्न्येन त्रिरन्वीक्ष्य मनीषया" ( भा० २।२।३४ ) इत्यादि । 
In the same regard, bhakti is established as the abhidheya in all scriptures by positive concomitance (anvaya), as in the following statement: 
After thrice studying and deliberating upon the entire corpus of the Vedas, the venerable Brahma, who was of one-pointed intellectual resolve, ascertained through his faculty of discernment that by which love for the Self [Śri Hari] is evoked. (SB 2.2.34)16 
तथा स्कान्दे पाच- 
A similar statement is found in the Skanda and Padma Purāņas: 
आलोड्य सर्वशास्त्राणि विचार्य च पुनः पुनः । 
इदमेव सुनिष्पन्नं ध्येयो नारायणः सदा ॥ ३०९ ॥ 
By churning all the scriptures and deliberating on them again and again, this alone is rightly concluded - that Bhagavan Nārāyaṇa is to be meditated upon constantly. (Skanda Purāņa 4.25.35, Linga Purana 2.7.11)17 
व्यतिरेकेण यथा गारुडे “अन्तं गतोऽपि वेदानाम्" इत्यादिकं सर्वत्रावगन्तव्यम् । तच् चान्ते दर्शयिष्यते । 
Bhakti is established by negative concomitance (vyatireka), as in this statement from the Garuda Purāṇa: 
Even if one has studied all the Vedas and knows the meaning of all scriptures, if he is not devoted to the Isvara of all beings, he should be known as the lowest of humankind. (Garuda Purāņa 1.231.17)18 
16 bhagavan brahma kärtsnyena trir anviksya maniṣayā 
tad-adhyavasyat kuṭastho ratir ātman yato bhavet See Anuccheda 29. 
17 alodya sarva-sastrāṇi vicārya ca punah punah 
18 
idam eva sunişpannam dhyeyo nārāyaṇaḥ sadā 
This verse could not be traced in the Padma Purana, but it is found in the Linga Purana. 
antam gato'pi vedänām sarva-sastrartha-vedyapi 
yo na sarvesvare bhaktas tam vidyat purusadhamam 
675 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
From these statements, it is to be understood that bhakti has been established everywhere. This will also be shown at the end [of this anuccheda]. 
(२) सर्वकर्तृषु यथा ( भा० २।७।४६ ) - 
( 2 ) Bhakti is encountered, or is possible, in all performers (sarva-karty) [implying that all living beings are eligible to participate in bhakti]. This is shown in Srimad Bhagavata: 
ते वै विदन्त्यतितरन्ति च देवमायां स्त्रीशूद्रहूणशबरा अपि पापजीवाः । यद्यद्भुतक्रमपरायणशीलशिक्षास्तिर्यग्जना अपि किमु श्रुतधारणा ये || ३०२ ॥ 
इति । 
Those who have been instructed in the moral integrity (sila) of those who are exclusively intent upon Bhagavan, the performer of extraordinary deeds, can certainly understand and cross over Bhagavan's deluding potency, even if they are women, sudras, hunas, sabaras, sinful beings, or even lower species, such as animals and birds. So, what can be said of those who have received the Vedic knowledge and fixed it in their hearts? (SB 2.7.46 ) 19 
गारुडेच- 
A similar statement is found in the Garuda Purāna as well: 
कीटपक्षिमृगाणां च हरौ सन्न्यस्तचेतसाम् । 
ऊर्द्धामेव गतिं मन्ये किं पुनर्ज्ञानिनां नृणाम् ॥ ३०३ ॥ 
The worms, birds, and animals whose minds are fixed on Bhagavan Hari certainly attain a higher destination, so what can be said of human beings who are situated in knowledge? (Garuda Purāna, ācāra khanda 230.30 ) 20 
अत्रैव साचारे दुराचारे ज्ञानिन्यज्ञानिनि विरक्ते रागिणि मुमुक्षौ मुक्ते भक्त्यसिद्धे भक्तिसिद्धे तस्मिन् भगवत्पार्षदतां प्राप्ते तस्मिन् नित्यपार्षदे च सामान्येन दर्शनादपि सार्वत्रिकता । 
19 
te vai vidanty atitaranti ca deva-māyām stri-sudra-huna-sabarā api pāpa-jīvāh yady adbhuta-krama-parāyana-sila-siksās tiryag-janā api kim u śruta-dhāranā ye 20 kita-paksi mrgānām ca harau sannyasta-cetasām 
ūrddhvām eva gatim manye kim punar-jñānināṁ nṛṇām 
676 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
In this respect, bhakti is observed (a) in people of virtuous conduct and those of ill conduct, (b) in the learned and those bereft of learning, (c) in those who are freed from attachment and those who are still attached, (d) in those seeking liberation and those already liberated, (e) in those whose bhakti is not yet perfected and those in whom it is perfected, (f) in those who have attained the liberated status of being associates of Bhagavan (prāpta-bhagavat-pārṣadas), and those who are eternally liberated associates (nitya-pārşadas). Because bhakti is seen to be universally present in all these different types of performers, "its being present everywhere" (sārvatrikatā), or in other words, "its accessibility to all" is thereby established. 
तत्र (क) साचारे दुराचारे च यथा ( गीता ९।३० ) - 
(a) Bhakti is encountered both in people of virtuous conduct and in those of ill conduct, as expressed in the Gitā: 
अपि चेत् सुदुराचारो भजते मामनन्यभाक् । 
साधुरेव स मन्तव्यः सम्यग् व्यवसितो हि सः || ३०४ ॥ इति । 
If even a person who is exceedingly ill-behaved worships Me with exclusive devotion, he should be regarded as indeed virtuous, because he is rightly resolved. (GĪTĀ 9.30)21 
सदाचारस्तु किं वक्तव्य इत्यपेरर्थः । 
The word api, "even," implies that since even a person of ill conduct is to be regarded as virtuous if engaged in exclusive devotion, then what can be said of a person of righteous conduct? 
(ख) ज्ञानिन्यज्ञानिनि च "ज्ञात्वाज्ञात्वाथ ये वै माम्” (भा० ११ | ११ | ३३) इत्यादि । 
(b) Bhakti is encountered both in the learned and in those bereft of learning, as expressed in the following verse: 
21 
api cet sudurăcăro bhajate mam ananya-bhāk 
sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag vyavasito hi sah 
677 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
Whether aware or unaware of the extent of My being, who I am in reality, and of what nature I am constituted, those who worship Me with exclusive devotion I consider to be the best of all devotees. (SB 11.11.33)22 
“हरिर्हरति पापानि दुष्टचित्तैरपि स्मृतः” (ना० पु० १।११।१००) इत्यादि । 
The same idea is affirmed in the Brhan-naradiya Purāṇa: 
Bhagavan Hari takes away sins even if remembered by those of impure awareness, [just as] fire certainly burns even if touched unintentionally. (BNP 1.11.100)23 
(ग) विरक्ते रागिणि च ( भा० ११ ।१४।१८) - 
(c) Bhakti is encountered both in those who are freed from attachment and by those who are still attached, as indicated in this verse: 
बाध्यमानोऽपि मद्भक्तो विषयैरजितेन्द्रियः । 
प्रायः प्रगल्भया भक्त्या विषयैर्नाभिभूयते ॥ ३०५ ॥ 
Although still attracted to the sense objects, a devotee of Mine who has not yet attained mastery over the senses is generally not overwhelmed by them because of bhakti's inherently powerful capability. (SB 11.14.18)24 
अबाध्यमानस्तु सुतरां नाभिभूयत इत्यपेरर्थः । 
The word api, "although" [in the phrase "although still attracted"], implies that one who is not so attracted is certainly not overwhelmed. This is the sense. 
(घ) मुमुक्षौ मुक्ते च “मुमुक्षवो घोररूपान्" (भा०१।२।२६) इत्यादि । 
jnätväjnätvätha ye vai mam yavan yas casmi yadṛśaḥ 
bhajanty ananya-bhavena te me bhaktatamā matāḥ "harir harati păpâni duşta-cittair api smrtah 
anicchayapi samsprsto dahaty eva hi pavakaḥ 
*^ badhyamano pi mad-bhakto visayair ajitendriyah 
prayah pragalbhaya bhaktyä visayair nabhibhuyate 
678 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
(d) Bhakti is encountered in those seeking liberation and in those who are already liberated. Instances of these two are shown respectively in the following two verses: 
As such, those who aspire for liberation (mumuksus), while altogether free from enmity [toward other gods], worship only the beatific expansions of Bhagavan Nārāyaṇa, avoiding frightful forms and the custodians of worldly beings. (SB 1.2.26)25 
“आत्मारामाश्च मुनयः” (भा० १।७।१०) इत्यादि च । 
And: 
The sages, though liberated from the knot of egoic identity, and though delighting in the Self alone, engage in causeless devotion to Śri Krsna, the majestic player (Urukrama), for Śrī Hari is intrinsically endowed with such captivating qualities. (SB 1.7.10)26 
(ङ) भक्त्यसिद्धे भक्तिसिद्धे च (भा० ६।१।१५) - 
(e) Bhakti is encountered in those whose bhakti is not yet perfected and those in whom it is perfected. Instances of these two are shown respectively in the following two verses: 
केचित् केवलया भक्त्या वासुदेवपरायणाः । 
अघं धुन्वन्ति कार्त्स्न्येन नीहारमिव भास्करः || ३०६ ॥ इति । 
And some, who are exclusively intent upon Vasudeva, destroy all their sins in their entirety through unalloyed devotion, just as the sun dissipates the morning fog. (SB 6.1.15)27 
“न चलति भगवत्पदारविन्दाल्लवनिमिषार्द्धमपि स वैष्णवाग्र्यः” (भा० ११ । २ । ५३) इति 
च । 
And: 
25 
26 
mumuksavo ghora-rupan hitva bhūta-patin atha nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ santa bhajanti hy anasuyavaḥ ātmārāmāś ca munayo nirgrantha apy urukrame kurvanty ahaitukim bhaktim ittham-bhūta-guno harih 27 kecit kevalaya bhaktyä väsudeva-parāyaṇāḥ 
agham dhunvanti kärtsnyena nihāram iva bhaskaraḥ 
679 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
He is the foremost Vaiṣṇava whose unabated remembrance never strays even for half a moment - not even for the sake of the opulence of the three worlds-from the lotus feet of Bhagavan, which are sought even by the gods for whom Ajita is their very Self. (SB 11.2.53)28 
(च) भगवत्पार्षदतां प्राप्ते ( भा० ९।४।६७ ) - 
(f) Bhakti is encountered in those who have attained the liberated status of being associates of Bhagavan (prapta-bhagavatpārṣadas), as expressed in the following verse: 
मत्सेवया प्रतीतं ते सालोक्यादिचतुष्टयम् । 
नेच्छन्ति सेवया पूर्णाः कुतोऽन्यत् कालविप्लुतम् ॥ ३०७ ॥ इति । 
Those devotees of Mine who have attained to the state of completion (purna) through divine service (seva) do not desire even the four types of liberation - such as eternal residence in My abode (sälokya) - which ensue of their own accord by service to Me. How then could they covet any other boon that is subject to the ravages of time? (SB 9.4.67)29 
नित्यपार्षद च ( भा० ३।१५।२२ ) - 
Bhakti is also encountered in Bhagavan's eternally liberated associates (nitya-pārṣadas), as confirmed in Brahma's statement to the devas: 
वापीषु विद्रुमतटास्वमलामृताप्सु प्रेष्यान्विता निजवने तुलसीभिरीशम् । अभ्यर्चती स्वलकमुन्नसमीक्ष्य वक्त्रमुच्छेषितं भगवतेत्यमताङ्ग यच्छ्रीः ॥ ३०८ ॥ 
O devas, when Śri Devi [i.e., Lakṣmi] accompanied by her maidservants, worships her beloved Lord with tulasi leaves in her pleasure garden, then seeing her face, with exquisite nose and gorgeous curls of hair, reflected in the crystal clear ambrosial water of her pond, whose banks are made of coral, she considers 
28 tri-bhuvana-vibhava-hetave'py akuntha-smrtir ajitätma suradibhir vimṛgyat na calati bhagavat-padaravindal lava-nimişārddham api sa vaiṣnavāgryaḥ mat-sevaya pratitam te salokyādi-catuştayam 
29 
necchanti sevayā pūrṇāḥ kuto'nyat kala-viplutam 
680 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
herself greatly fortunate, thinking, "this face has been kissed by Bhagavan." (SB 3.15.22)30 
(३) सर्वेषु वर्षेषु भुवनेषु ब्रह्माण्डेषु तेषां बहिश्च तैस्तैः श्रीभगवदुपासनायाः क्रियमाणायाः श्रीभागवतादिषु प्रसिद्धिः सिद्धैवेति सर्वदेशोदाहरणं ज्ञेयम् । 
(3) It is well known from scriptures such as Srimad Bhagavata that the worship of Sri Bhagavan is performed by various devotees in all divisions of the Earth (varṣas), all planets (bhuvanas), all universes (brahmāṇḍas), and even beyond them. Therefore, this should be understood as an illustration of how bhakti is encountered in all places (sarva-desa). 
(४) सर्वेषु करणेषु यथा- 
(4) Bhakti is encountered in the instrumentality of all the senses (sarva-karana), as indicated in this statement: 
मानसेनोपचारेण परिचर्य हरिं मुदा । 
परेऽवाङ्मनसागम्यं तं साक्षात् प्रतिपेदिरे ॥ ३०९ ॥ इत्यादि । 
By joyfully serving Bhagavan Hari with objects conceived within the mind, some devotees directly attained Him, who is beyond speech and mind.31 
31 
एवम्भूतवचने ह्यस्तु तावद् बहिरिन्द्रियेण मनसा वचसापि तत्सिद्धिप्रसिद्धिः । 
By such statements, it is evidenced that bhakti is enacted even through the mind and speech, not to mention through the external senses. This is a well-known fact. 
(५) सर्वद्रव्येषु यथा ( भा० १० । ८१।४ ) - 
30 
31 
vāpīṣu vidruma-taṭāsv amalāmṛtāpsu presyānvita nija-vane tulasibhir isam abhyarcati svalakam unnasam ikşya vaktram ucchesitaṁ bhagavatety amatanga yac-chriḥ manasenopacarena paricarya harim mudā 
pare van manasagamyam tam sākṣāt pratipedire 
This verse is quoted in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.182), where it is credited to "another Purana" (puränäntare). 
681I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
(5) Bhakti is encountered in relation to all objects (sarvadravya): 
पत्रं पुष्पं फलं तोयं यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छति । 
तदहं भक्त्युपहृतमश्नामि प्रयतात्मनः || ३१० ॥ इति । 
If one offers Me with devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit, or water, I partake of that offering presented with love by a person whose consciousness is fixed on Me. (SB 10.81.4) 32 
(६) सर्वक्रियासु यथा ( भा० ११।२।१२ ) - 
(6) Bhakti is encountered in all actions (sarva-kriyā), as shown in the following statements: 
श्रुतोऽनुपठितो ध्यात आदृतो वानुमोदितः । 
सद्यः पुनाति सद्धर्मो देवविश्वद्रुहोऽपि हि ॥ ३११ ॥ इति । 
Whether heard about, repeated to others, meditated upon, honored, or simply approved of, this religion of devotion (saddharma, i.e., bhāgavata-dharma) certainly purifies at once even those who are inimical to the devas and the world. (SB 11.2.12)33 
गीता ९।२१- 
And: 
32 
यत् करोषि यदश्नासि यज् जुहोषि ददासि यत् । यत् तपस्यसि कौन्तेय तत् कुरुष्व मदर्पणम् ॥ ३१२ ॥ 
Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in sacrifice, whatever you donate in charity, and whatever austerity you perform, O son of Kunti, do that as an offering unto Me. (GĪTĀ 9.27)34 
patram puspam phalam toyam yo me bhaktyä prayacchati 
tad aham bhakty upahṛtam aśnami prayatātmanah 
33 śruto'nupathito dhyata adṛto vanumoditaḥ 
sadyaḥ punāti sad-dharmo deva-visva-druho'pi hi 
34 yat karoşi yad aśnāsi yaj juhosi dadasi yat 
yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kuruşva mad-arpanam 
682 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
एवं भक्त्याभासेषु भक्त्याभासापराधेष्वपि अजामिलमूषिकादयो दृष्टान्ता गम्याः । 
In this manner, even in the category of a mere semblance of bhakti (bhaktyābhāsa) and even in the matter of offenses that nonetheless involve a semblance of bhakti, we find examples such as that of Ajamila and the mouse, respectively.35 
(७) सर्वेषु कार्येषु यथा (स्कान्दे ) - 
(7) Bhakti is encountered in all types of prescribed duties (sarvakārya), as stated in the Skanda Purāṇa: 
यस्य स्मृत्या च नामोक्त्या तपोयज्ञक्रियादिषु । 
न्यूनं सम्पूर्णतां याति सद्यो वन्दे तमच्युतम् ॥ ३१३ ॥ इति । 
I offer obeisance to Bhagavan Acyuta, by whose remembrance or by uttering whose name, all imperfections in the performance of penance, sacrifice, and rituals are immediately rectified. (Skanda Purāna)36 
(८) सर्वफलेषु यथा “अकामः सर्वकामो वा मोक्षकाम उदारधीः" ( भा० २|३|१० ) इत्यादि । 
(8) Bhakti is encountered in regard to the attainment of all varieties of results (sarva-phala), as expressed in the following 
verse: 
35 The example of Ajamila shows that even by the routine act of calling his son, 
named Nārāyaṇa, Ajamila received the benefit of chanting the name of Bhagavan Nārāyana. This is an instance of bhaktyäbhasa, which will be discussed in greater detail in Anuccheda 172. Similarly, there was a mouse that lived in a temple of Bhagavan. This mouse used to steal ghee wicks offered to the deity, which was a type of offense. One day, the ghee wick, which was still burning, got stuck in its teeth. Due to the pain, the mouse started jumping up and down and finally died. His jumping up and down with the burning ghee wick was taken as a semblance of bhakti in the form of an arati ceremony, and thus in the next life, he was born as a queen who was fond of offering ghee lamps to the deity. She became liberated in that life. This topic will be discussed in Anuccheda 153. yasya smṛtya ca namoktyā tapo-yajña-kriyādiṣu 
36 
nyūnaṁ sampūrṇatām yati sadyo vande tam acyutam 
683 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
A person of evolved discernment, whether desireless, full of desire, or seeking liberation, should worship the Supreme Puruşa with resolute bhakti-yoga. (SB 2.3.10)37 
तथा “यथा तरोर्मूलनिषेचनेन ” ( भा० ४ । ३१ । १४) इत्यादिवाक्येन हरिपरिचर्यायां क्रियमाणायां सर्वेषामन्येषामपि देवादीनामुपासना स्वत एव सिध्यतीत्यतोऽपि सार्वत्रिकता । 
Additionally [apart from the eight criteria just discussed], bhakti's universality (sārvatrikatā) is indicated in statements such as the following: 
Just as by pouring water on the root of a tree, its trunk, branches, and twigs become nourished, and just as by supplying food to the vital life current (prāna), the senses gain strength, so too by worshiping Bhagavan Acyuta [Krsna], the worship of all entities is effected. (SB 4.31.14)38 
By this principle as well, bhakti's universality (sārvatrikatā) is established, because by rendering service to Bhagavān Hari the worship of all entities and even of all other devas is automatically accomplished. 
यथोक्तं स्कान्दे श्रीब्रह्मनारदसंवादे - 
This is also affirmed in a conversation between Śrī Brahmā and Narada in the Skanda Purana: 
अर्चिते देवदेवेशे शङ्खचक्रगदाधरे । 
अर्चिताः सर्वदेवाः स्युर्यतः सर्वगतो हरिः || ३१४ || 
When Bhagavan Visņu, the Supreme Deva of all the devas, who wields a conch, a disc, and a club, is worshiped, then all other devas are worshiped, because Bhagavan Hari is present within everything. (Skanda Purana)"9 
37 akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā mokṣa-kama udara-dhīḥ 
38 
tivrena bhakti-yogena yajeta purusam param 
yatha taror mula-nisecanena trpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyānāṁ tathaiva sarvarhanam acyutejyā 
39 arcite deva-deveśe sankha-cakra-gadadhare 
arcitāḥ sarva-devāḥ syur yataḥ sarva-gato hariḥ The verse is not found in the printed edition. 
684 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
Commentary 
In this subsection of Anuccheda 115, Śri Jiva Gosvāmi continues to analyze the fourth seed verse of the catuḥ-sloki (SB 2.9.35). In reply to the question, "where is bhakti encountered?" the verse answers, "everywhere" (sarvatra). Taking this in a very literal sense, Śrī Jīva then elaborates eight categories in which bhakti's pervasiveness is evidenced, providing examples for each. He states that bhakti is encountered in all (1) scriptures (sastra), (2) performers or agents of action (karty), (3) places (desa), (4) senses (karana), (5) objects (dravya), (6) actions (kriya), (7) prescribed duties (kārya), and (8) results (phala). Additionally, Śri Jiva shows that by performing bhakti to Bhagavan, the worship of all the devas and of all living beings is automatically effected. From this analysis, bhakti's status as the abhidheya of Srimad Bhāgavata is emphatically established. 
115.5 
Bhakti Is Encountered in All the Grammatical Cases 
एवं यो भक्तिं करोति यद् गवादिकं भगवते दीयते येन द्वारभूतेन भक्तिः क्रियते यस्मै श्रीभगवत्प्रीणनार्थं दीयते यस्माद् गवादिकात् पयआदिकमादाय भगवते निवेद्यते यस्मिन् देशादौ कुले वा कश्चिद भक्तिमनुतिष्ठति तेषामपि कृतार्थत्वं पुराणेषु दृश्यत इति कारकगतापि । एवं सार्वत्रिकत्वं साधितम् । 
Bhakti is thus encountered even in all the grammatical cases, since it is evidenced in the Purāņas that the person who performs bhakti, the cow or other items that are offered to Bhagavän, the instrument by means of which bhakti is performed, the one to whom a gift is presented for the satisfaction of Śri Bhagavăn, the cow and other entities from whom milk and other items are taken to be offered to Bhagavan, and the place or the family in which someone performs devotion, all attain fulfillment thereby. In this manner, the "all-pervasiveness" (sārvatrikatā) of bhakti is established. 
685 
Commentary 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
40 
Bhakti's all-pervasiveness is also verified by the fact that it can be applied to all the karakas, or grammatical cases. In this regard, Jīva Gosvāmi points out that in the Puranas we find statements about bhakti regarding the subject, direct object, agent, indirect object, source, and location of the action, all of which are perfected (kṛtārtha) because of contact with bhakti. The word kṛtārtha, "perfected or fulfilled," is applied to each of these in the examples given. The statements found in the Puranas proceed along the following general lines: 
1. Yo bhaktim karoti, "One who performs bhakti [is fulfilled]." Here, the pronoun yah, "one who," is in the nominative case, being the subject of the sentence. 
2. Yad gavadikam bhagavate diyate, "The cow or other items that are offered to Bhagavan [attain perfection]." The word gavādikam, "the cow or other items," although the subject of this passive voice sentence, retains the sense of the accusative in Sanskrit, because it refers to the object given. 
3. Yena dvara-bhūtena bhaktiḥ kriyate, "The instrument by means of which bhakti is performed [is perfected]." The phrase yena dvara-bhūtena, "the instrument by means of which," is in the instrumental case, showing agency. 
4. Yasmai śri bhagavat-priṇanartham diyate, "The one to whom a gift is presented for the satisfaction of Śrī Bhagavan [attains perfection]." The pronoun yasmai, "the one to whom," is in the dative case, being the indirect object of the verb. 
5. Yasmad gavādikāt paya adikam adaya bhagavate nivedyate, "The cow and other entities from whom milk and other items are taken to be offered to Bhagavan [are fulfilled]." The words yasmād gavādikat, "the cow and other entities from whom," are in the ablative case, showing the source of the milk and other 
items. 
40 The six karakas of Sanskrit correspond to the following cases in English: the 
nominative (the subject of the action), accusative (the direct object), instrumental (the agent or instrument by means of which the action is performed), dative (the indirect object), ablative (the source or origin from which the action proceeds), and locative (the place or location of the action). 
686 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
6. And yasmin deśadau kule va kaścid bhaktim anutisthati, "The place or the family in which someone performs devotion [is perfected]." The phrase yasmin desadau kule va, "the place or the family in which," is in the locative case, because it shows the location of the action. 
115.6 
Bhakti Is Encountered at All Times 
सदातनत्वमाह - सर्वदेति । 
Next, we will examine bhakti's omnitemporality (sadātanatvam), commenting on the word sarvadā, “at all times" [from the fourth seed verse of the catuh-sloki (SB 2.9.35)]. 
( १ ) तत्र सर्गादौ यथा “कालेन नष्टा प्रलये वाणीयं वेदसञ्ज्ञिता" (भा० ११ | १४ | ३ ) इत्यादि । 
(1) Bhakti was in existence from the very beginning of the evolutionary cycle, as stated in the following verse: 
In due course of time, this speech of Mine, known as the Veda, remained undisclosed during the period of dissolution. In it, the dharma that is entailed is constituted of the very essence of My Being (mad-atmakah). It was spoken by Me once again to Brahma at the beginning of a new evolutionary cycle. (SB 11.14.3)*1 
सर्गमध्ये बहुत्रैव । 
There are innumerable statements verifying bhakti's continued existence during the ongoing period in the midst of an evolutionary cycle. 
(२) चतुर्विधप्रलयेष्वपि “तत्रेमं क उपासीरन् क उ स्विदनुशेरते” (भा०३।७।३७) इति विदुरप्रश्ने । 
41 kalena nasta pralaye vaniyam veda-sañjnitā 
mayadau brahmane prokta dharmo yasyam mad-atmakaḥ 
687 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
( 2 ) Bhakti exists even during the four different categories of dissolution, as implied by Vidura's question: "When Bhagavan lies down during the period of dissolution, who worships Him and who follows Him into repose?" (SB 3.7.37).42 
(३) सर्वेषु युगेषु (भा० १२।३।५२ ) - 
( 3 ) Bhakti exists in all the yugas: 
कृते यद् ध्यायतो विष्णुं त्रेतायां यजतो मखैः । 
द्वापरे परिचर्यायां कलौ तद्धरिकीर्तनात् ॥ ३१५ ॥ इति । 
What is attained in Satyayuga by meditation on Bhagavan Visņu, in Tretayuga by worshiping Bhagavan through sacrifice, and in Dvaparayuga by worship of the deity, is attained in Kaliyuga merely by singing the praises of Bhagavan Hari. (SB 12.3.52 ) 43 
किं बहुना ? - 
What more needs to be said? 
साहानिस्तन् महच्छिद्रं स मोहः स च विभ्रमः । यन्मुहूर्तं क्षणं वापि वासुदेवो न चिन्त्यते ॥ ३१६ ॥ 
इत्यपि वैष्णवे । 
When a moment or even an instant is passed without awareness of Vasudeva, that is a loss, that is a tragic mistake, that is delusion, and that is a great confusion. (Visnu Puräna ) * 
(४) सर्वावस्थास्वपि – (क) गर्भे श्रीनारदकारितश्रवणेन श्रीप्रह्लादे प्रसिद्धम् ( ख ) बाल्ये श्रीध्रुवादिषु (ग) यौवने श्रीमदम्बरीषादिषु (घ) वार्धक्ये धृतराष्ट्रादिषु (ङ) मरणेऽजामिलादिषु (च) स्वर्गितायां श्रीचित्रकेत्वादिषु (छ) नारकितायामपि - 
42 tatremam ka upasiran ka u svid anuserate 
43 kṛte yad dhyāyato visņum tretayam yajato makhaiḥ dvapare paricaryāyāṁ kalau tad dhari-kirtanāt 
"4 så hanis tan mahac-chidram sa mohaḥ sa ca vibhramah 
yan-muhurtar ksanam vapi vasudevo na cintyate 
This verse is not found in the extant editions of Visnu Purāna. 
688 
15 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
यथा यथा हरेर्नाम कीर्तयन्ति स्म नारकाः । 
तथा तथा हरौ भक्तिमुद्वहन्तो दिवं ययुः || ३१७ || 
इति श्रीनृसिंहपुराणात् । 
(4) Bhakti is also seen to exist in all stages of life (sarva-avasthā): It is well known that even in the womb bhakti was evidenced in Śrī Prahlada, who was induced to hear about Bhagavan by Śrī Nārada. Bhakti was present in Dhruva and others in childhood, in Ambarīşa and others during youth, in Dhṛtarastra and others in old age, in Ajamila and others at the time of death, in Citraketu and others in the afterlife on attaining heaven, and in yet others even after entering hell. Bhakti's existence even in hell is verified in the following verse from the Nrsimha Purāņa: 
In accordance with the manner in which the residents of hell chanted the name of Bhagavan Hari, they attained corresponding positions in the divine abode, taking support from their devotion to Śri Hari. (Nrsimha Purāṇa)45 
अत एवोक्तं दुर्वाससा “मुच्येत यन्नाम्न्युदिते नारकोऽपि ” ( भा०९।४।६२) इति । 
Therefore, the sage Durväsä said: "[What indeed is impossible for You, Bhagavan], by the chanting of whose name even a resident of hell may be liberated?" (SB 9.4.62).46 
यथा ( भा० २।१।११) - 
And [the fact that bhakti is seen to be present at all times, meaning both in the stages of sadhana and sädhya] is also confirmed in the following verse: 
45 
46 
yatha yatha harer näma kirtayanti sma nārakāḥ tatha tatha harau bhaktim udvahanto divam yayuḥ mucyeta yan-namny udite nārako'pi 
689 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
एतन् निर्विद्यमानानामिच्छतामकुतोभयम् । 
योगिनां नृप निर्णीतं हरेर्नामानुकीर्तनम् ॥ ३१८ ॥ इत्यत्रापि । 
O King, for those seeking fulfillment of material desires [icchatām, i.e., kāminām], for those who are indifferent to worldly existence [nirvidyamānānām, i.e., mumukṣūņām] and seeking the state of utter fearlessness [akuto-bhayam, i.e., mokṣam icchatam]," and for those already established in immediate realization of the Truth [yoginām, i.e., jñāninām], this constant chanting of the holy name of Bhagavan Hari has been ascertained [both as the means of attainment (sadhana), in the case of the first two, and as the end to be attained (sādhya), in the case of the last]. (SB 2.1.11)48 
Commentary 
After providing examples to illustrate sadhana-bhakti's omnipresence (sārvatrikatva), lit., "its being present everywhere" (sarvatra), Śrī Jiva next demonstrates bhakti's omnitemporality (sadātanatvam), or "its being present at all times" (sarvadā). In this regard, he shows bhakti's existence in the three primary categories of universal time, namely, (1) at the very beginning of creation, (2) in the midst of the dissolution, and (3) throughout the period of sustenance, which is divided into four yugas. He then adds a fourth category, which relates to the phases of individual time. In this respect, he shows that bhakti is found to exist in all the various stages of life (sarva-avastha), beginning from the prenatal or embryonic period and extending throughout childhood, youth, old age, death, and the afterlife, including both the ascension to heaven and even existence in hell. 
47 Śrī Viraraghava 
48 etan nirvidyamānānām icchatām akuto-bhayam 
yoginām nrpa nirnitam harer nämänukirtanam 
Unless otherwise indicated, all bracketed inserts in this verse are according to the commentary of Sridhara Svami. 
690 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
It is striking to learn that even people in hell performed bhakti and were liberated. This story is recounted in the seventh and eighth chapters of Nrsimha Purana. The sage Bhrgu had a son named Mrkandu, who had a son called Märkandeya. At his birth, an astrologer predicted that Märkandeya would die at the age of twelve. His parents were aggrieved to hear of this. The boy grew up and became vastly learned at a young age, but his parents remained sorrowful, remembering the astrologer's prediction. One day, Märkandeya asked them the reason for their gloom. His mother then informed him of the prediction. The boy assured her, saying, "Do not worry, Mother, I will resort to penance and conquer over death." Saying this, he left for the forest. 
Arriving there, Märkandeya met his grandfather Bhrgu in the assembly of sages. After exchanging greetings, Bhrgu asked him why he had come to the forest at such a tender age. The boy told him the reason. Bhrgu instructed the boy to take shelter of Krsna and chant the twelve-syllable mantra. Mārkaṇḍeya learned how to meditate from his grandfather and then began to engage in severe penance. His mind was fully absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa. 
When the time for his death arrived, the servants of Yamaraja appeared before Märkandeya. When they tried to approach him, they were struck by the clubs of Visņu's servants. Then Death himself came, but he too was driven away by the servants of Viṣṇu. In this manner, Märkandeya conquered over death. 
The Yamadūtas then approached their master, Yamarāja, and related the whole incident. They questioned him about the identity of Vişnu's servants and the reason why they had come to protect Märkandeya. Yamarāja instructed them about Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa and ordered them never to approach a Vaisnava. He added that they were fortunate that the Viṣṇudūtas had spared their lives. Yamarāja was then suddenly filled with compassion for the residents of hell. He asked them why they did not take shelter of Krsna and recite His names, for Kṛṣṇa promised to deliver anyone who did so, even from hell. Krsna's statement in this regard is as follows: 
6911 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
I uplift even from hell, anyone who remembers Me constantly, calling out, "Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" Such a person breaks free like a lotus emerging from the water. I deliver anyone who declares, "O Lotus-eyed one! O Lord of the devas, O Narasimha! Trivikrama! I have taken shelter of You." I rescue from all miseries anyone 
who approaches Me in full submission, saying, "I have surrendered to You, O Lord of Lords, Janardana!" (Nrsimha Purana 8.27-29)49 
On hearing these instructions, the residents of hell began calling out the names of Krsna and Narasimha and were immediately liberated. It is thus shown that bhakti is possible even in hell. 
The statement from the Visnu Purana sums up the importance of not allowing a moment to pass in forgetfulness of Vasudeva. In concluding the discussion of the fourth category related to time, namely, how bhakti is present in all possible phases of individual life (sarva-avastha), Śrī Jīva cites SB 2.1.11. According to Śrīdhara Svāmi's commentary on this verse, Sukadeva's statement shows that bhakti exists both in the stage of sadhana and in that of sadhya. For those desiring material fruits or liberation, bhakti is ascertained as the means, whereas for those who have attained perfection in realization, bhakti is recognized as the end result. 
115.7 
Bhakti Established through Negative Concomitance 
अथ तत्र तत्र व्यतिरेकोदाहरणानि च कियन्ति दर्श्यन्ते- 
किं वेदैः किमु शास्त्रैर्वा किं वा तीर्थनिषेवणैः । विष्णुभक्तिविहीनानां किं तपोभिः किमध्वरैः ॥ ३१९ ॥ 
49 he kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇeti yo mam smarati nityaśaḥ 
jalam bhittvä yathā padmaṁ narakad uddharamy aham punḍarīkākṣa deveśa narasimha trivikrama 
tvām ahaṁ śaraṇam prapta iti yas tam samuddhare tvām prapanno'smi saranam devadeva janardana iti yah saranam praptas tam klesad uddharamy aham 
692 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
किं तस्य बहुभिः शास्त्रैः किं तपोभिः किमध्वरैः । वाजपेयसहस्रैर्वा भक्तिर्यस्य जनार्दने ॥ ३२० ॥ 
इति बृहन्नारदीयपाद्मवचनादीनि । 
Now, by negative concomitance ( vyatireka), a few other examples will be shown that confirm bhakti's existence everywhere and at all times. The following statement is found both in the Bṛhan-naradiya Purana and the Padma Purana: 
For those who are devoid of bhakti to Bhagavan Visņu, what is the use of studying the Vedas or any other scriptures, of undertaking a pilgrimage to the holy places, of observing penances, or of performing sacrifices? Furthermore, for one who is endowed with bhakti to Bhagavan Janardana, what is the point of studying many scriptures, of observing penances, of performing sacrifices, or even of conducting thousands of Vajapeya sacrifices? (Brhan-nāradiya Purāna, Padma Purāna) 50 
तथा ( भा० २।४।१७, भा० ५।१९।२४, भा० १०५९/४१ ) - 
[The following statements are from Srimad Bhāgavata:] 
तपस्विनो दानपरा यशस्विनो मनस्विनो मन्त्रविदः सुमङ्गलाः । क्षेमं न विन्दन्ति विना यदर्पणं तस्मै सुभद्रश्रवसे नमो नमः ॥ ३२१ ॥ न यत्र वैकुण्ठकथासुधापगा न साधवो भागवतास्तदाश्रयाः । न यत्र यज्ञेशमखा महोत्सवाः सुरेशलोकोऽपि न वै स सेव्यताम् ॥ ३२२ ॥ ययाच आनम्य किरीटकोटिभिः पादौ स्पृशन्नच्युतमर्थसाधनम् । सिद्धार्थ एतेन विगृह्यते महानहो सुराणां च तमो धिगाढ्यताम् ॥ ३२३ ॥ 
Those who are devoted to penance [the jñānis], those who are charitable [karmis in general], those who are of great repute [karmis of unique distinction who execute elaborate sacrifices, such as the aśvamedha], those who practice mindfulness [the 
50 kim vedaiḥ kim u sastrair va kim va tirtha-nisevanaiḥ visņu-bhakti-vihinānam kim tapobhih kim adhvaraih 
kim tasya bahubhiḥ sastraiḥ kim tapobhiḥ kim adhvaraiḥ väjapeya-sahasrair va bhaktir yasya janardane 
Neither of these verses could be found in the extant editions of these two scriptures. 
693 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
yogis], those who are adept in the science of mantras [i.e., in the Agama scriptures], and those who perform virtuous works [i.e., those who adhere to a strict moral code], all obtain no benefit if they do not offer their actions to Bhagavan. I offer repeated obeisances to Him, whose fame is most auspicious. (SB 2.4.17) 51 
Be it the abode even of Brahma, the chief of the gods, that place is certainly not fit to be dwelt in where the ambrosial rivers of Bhagavan's narrations do not flow, where there are no saintly devotees of Bhagavan taking shelter of such topics, and where there are no grand festivals performed in worship of the Lord of Sacrifice. (SB 5.19.24)52 
And: 
Bowing down in reverence and touching Śri Krsna's feet with the tip of his crown, Indra had formerly petitioned Bhagavan Acyuta to accomplish his objectives. But once his purpose had been fulfilled, healthough of great eminence (mahan)fought with Him. Alas! Even the gods succumb to ignorance. Shame on their opulence! (SB 10.59.41)53 
"सालोक्यसाष्र्ष्टिसामीप्य ( भा०३।२९।१३ ) इत्यादि न दानं न तपो नेज्या" ( भा० ७/७/५२ ) इत्यादि । "नैष्कर्म्यमप्यच्युतभाववर्जितम् (भा० १| ५ | १२ ) इत्यादि । “नात्यन्तिकं विगणयन्त्यपि ते ” ( भा० ३।१५।४८) इत्यादि च । 
And: 
Even if granted by Me, [My] people (janah) do not accept mukti in the form of residence on the same planet as Me (salokya), enjoyment of similar opulence (särsti), proximity to Me (samipya), endowment with a form identical to Mine (sarūpya), or 
51 tapasvino dāna-para yasasvino manasvino mantra-vidah sumangalāḥ 
53 
kşemam na vindanti vina yad-arpanam tasmai subhadra-śravase namo namah The bracketed inserts are according to the gloss of Sri Viśvanatha Cakravarti. na yatra vaikuntha-katha-sudhāpaga na sadhavo bhāgavatās tad-āśrayāḥ 
na yatra yajñesa-makha mahotsavah suresa-loko'pi na vai sa sevyatām yayāca anamya kirita-kotibhiḥ padau spṛśann acyutam artha-sadhanam siddhartha etena vigrhyate mahan aho surānāṁ ca tamo dhig adhyatām 
694 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
oneness with Me (aikatvam), if such liberated states preclude the possibility of service to Me. (SB 3.29.13)54 
And: 
Bhagavan Hari is pleased only by untainted devotion and not by charity, penance, worship, purity, or vows. Without devotion, everything else is merely a show. (SB 7.7.52)55 
And: 
Even naiskarmya-jñāna, or "the awareness that pertains to the very nature of Brahman," which frees one from all taints (niranjanam), is inadequately illuminating if devoid of devotional affect (bhava) for Bhagavan Acyuta [Sri Krsna]. What then can be said of motivated action [kamya-karma], which is always inauspicious, or even of unmotivated action (akāraṇam), when not offered to Bhagavan? (SB 1.5.12, SB 12.12.52)56 
And: 
O Dear One, Your glories are themselves a sacred place of pilgrimage (tirtha) and hence worthy of recitation. Those who have taken shelter of Your lotus feet, who are skillful in narrating Your stories, and who are conversant with the aesthetic rapture (rasa) implicit in such topics, do not regard even ultimate liberation as Your mercy, to say nothing of other boons, which are susceptible to fear at the merest knitting of Your eyebrows. (SB 3.15.48)57 
54 sälokya-sārṣṭi-samipya-sarūpyaikatvam apy uta 
55 
56 
diyamanaṁ na grhnanti vina mat-sevanam janāḥ 
na danam na tapo nejya na saucam na vratāni ca 
priyate'malaya bhaktyä harir anyad vidambanam 
naiskarmyam apy acyuta-bhava-varjitam na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam kutaḥ punaḥ sasvad abhadram isvare na carpitam karma yad apy akāraṇam 57 natyantikam viganayanty api te prasādam 
kim v anyad arpita-bhayam bhruva unnayais te ye'nga tvad-anghri-sarana bhavataḥ kathayāḥ kirtanya-tirtha-yasasaḥ kusala rasa-jñāḥ 
695 
Commentary 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
After demonstrating how bhakti has been established as the abhidheya for all circumstances of place and time with regard to Srimad Bhāgavata (2.9.35), Śri Jiva now confirms the same from the logic of negative concomitance (vyatireka). In this regard, the verses that he cites point out that even studying scriptures, undertaking varieties of auspicious or prescribed actions, being promoted to heavenly abodes, such as that of Brahmā, or even attaining any of the five types of liberation, are all without value if the performer is devoid of bhakti. The imperativeness of bhakti is thus established through the logic of negation. 
In the next subsection, Śrī Jiva will cite a number of references in which bhakti is established as essential both "everywhere" and "at all times." 
115.8 
Bhakti Established for All Places and Times 
अथ “सर्वत्र सर्वदा यदुपपद्यते” इत्यादि योजनिकार्थो युगपद् यथा “तस्मात् सर्वात्मना राजन् हरिः सर्वत्र सर्वदा ” ( भा० २।२।३६) इत्यादि । 
Now, with reference to the phrase, “which is encountered everywhere (sarvatra) and at all times (sarvadā)" [from SB 2.9.35], we present examples in which bhakti is established simultaneously both for all places and all times: 
Therefore, O King, Bhagavan Hari is to be heard about, glorified, and remembered always and everywhere by all human beings with the totality of their being. (SB 2.2.36)58 
अन्वयव्यतिरेकाभ्यां सदा यदुपपद्यत इत्यत्र यथा (पाद्मे ) - 
58 tasmāt sarvātmanā rājan hariḥ sarvatra sarvadā 
śrotavyaḥ kirtitavyas ca smartavyo bhagavan nṛṇām 
696 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
In the next verse from the Padma Purana, we find an example of bhakti being recommended for all times both by affirmation and by negation: 
स्मर्तव्यः सततं विष्णुर्विस्मर्तव्यो न जातुचित् । सर्वे विधिनिषेधाः स्युरेतयोरेव किङ्कराः || ३२४ ॥ 
One should remember Bhagavan Visņu always and never forget Him even for a moment. All the injunctions and prohibitions of scripture are servants of these two principles alone. (Padma Purāṇa, Uttara-khanda 71.100)59 
अन्वयव्यतिरेकाभ्यां सदा सर्वत्र यदुपपद्यत इति साकल्येऽपि यथा “न ह्यतोऽन्यः शिवः पन्थाः " ( भा० २।२।३३) इत्युपक्रम्य तदुपसंहारे (भा० २।२।३६) - 
Now, taking the second line of SB 2.9.35 in its entirety (anvayavyatirekābhyāṁ yat syat sarvatra sarvada), we can show how bhakti has been established for all circumstances of time and place, both by affirmation and by negation. This is evidenced in a group of verses beginning from SB 2.2.33 and concluding with SB 2.2.36. The opening statement is as follows: 
For human beings entangled in this world of repeated birth and death, there is no other path more auspicious than that by which (yatah) bhakti-yoga for Bhagavan Vasudeva can come into being. (SB 2.2.33)60 
The concluding statement from this group is as follows: 
59 
तस्मात् सर्वात्मना राजन् हरिः सर्वत्र सर्वदा । 
श्रोतव्यः कीर्तितव्यश्च स्मर्तव्यो भगवान् नृणाम् ॥ ३२५ ॥ इति । 
Therefore, O King, Bhagavan Hari is to be heard about, glorified, and remembered always and everywhere by all human beings with the totality of their being. (SB 2.2.36)61 
smartavyaḥ satatam vişnur vismartavyo na jātucit sarve vidhi-niṣedhah syur etayor eva kinkarāḥ 
60 na hy ato'nyah sivah pantha visataḥ samsṛtāv iha 
vasudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogo yato bhavet 
61 
tasmat sarvātmanā rājan hariḥ sarvatra sarvadā śrotavyah kirtitavyaś ca smartavyo bhagavan nṛṇām 
697 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
नृणां जीवानाम् । " इति नृगतिं विविच्य कवयः” (भा० १० १८७।२०) इतिवत् । 
In this verse, the word nṛṇam, literally, "for all men," means, "for all living beings" (jīvānām). The word ny has been interpreted in the same manner [by Śridhara Svāmi] in SB 10.87.20, in reference to the clause iti nr-gatim vivicya kavayaḥ, "The realized mystic poets, having thus ascertained the existential nature of the living beings (nr-gatim, i.e., jīva-tattvam)...' 
Commentary 
"62 
In SB 2.2.33 from the group of verses referred to by Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī (SB 2.2.33-36), the word bhakti-yoga is directly mentioned. In this verse, Śrī Śukadeva positively affirms bhakti as the most auspicious path (anvaya) and also disaffirms the relevance of other paths (vyatireka). Although the words sarvatra and sarvada are not mentioned in this verse, they are found in the final verse from this group. Thus, by the grammatical rule known as mandūka-plutinyaya, these two words can be conjoined to the first verse, because the subject of the two intervening verses is also bhakti. From this analysis, it is abundantly clear that the Bhāgavata's purpose, or in other words, its abhidheya, is to engage everyone in bhakti. 
63 
In this manner, Śrī Jīva has shown that the words sarvatra and sarvadā in SB 2.9.35, whether taken individually or together, by affirmation as well as by negation, have their import in bhakti alone. It may be noted that there is no direct mention of bhakti in SB 2.9.35. The verse simply states that one who is inquisitive to realize the truth of the Self should inquire into that alone (etavad eva) which is applicable everywhere and at all times, both through the logic 
*2 Śrīdhara Svāmi's gloss is as follows: nr-gatim nur jivasya gatim tattvam, "In the compound nr-gatim, the word ny means of the living beings' (jivasya) and the word gatim means 'existential nature' (tattvam)." 
63 Manduka-pluti literally means "the jump of a frog." The sense is that just as a 
frog moves by leaping over an intervening space, so too a word or words from a preceding verse or sutra can be correlated to a following verse by omitting one or more verses in the middle. This principle is often used in the interpretation of Panini's sutras. 
698 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
of affirmation and negation. Jiva Gosvāmi has taken it axiomatically that this can refer only to bhakti. He has also quoted many scriptural statements throughout this anuccheda to demonstrate that bhakti alone is possible in all times and circumstances. To further strengthen his conclusion, he will now show that this cannot refer to anything else. 
115.9 
Bhakti Alone Is without Cessation 
एतदुक्तं भवति - यत् “कर्म" तत् सन्यासभोगशरीरप्राप्त्यवधि । “योगः ” सिद्व्यवधिः । “साङ्ख्यम्” आत्मज्ञानावधि । “ज्ञानम्" मोक्षावधि । तथा तथा तत्तद्योग्यतादिकानि च सर्वाणि । एवम्भूतेषु तेषु कर्मादिषु शास्त्रादिव्यभिचारिता ज्ञेया । हरिभक्तेस्तु अन्वयव्यक्तिरेकाभ्यां सदा सर्वत्र तत्तन्महिमाभिरुपपन्नत्वात् तथाभूतस्य रहस्यस्याङ्गत्वं युक्तम् । यतो रहस्याङ्गत्वेन च ज्ञानरूपार्थान्तराच्छन्नतयैवेदमुक्तमिति । 
One more point is to be noted here. The path of karma-yoga reaches its conclusion either on accepting the renounced order (sannyasa) or on obtaining a body suitable for enjoyment (bhogaśarīra); yoga ends after attaining yogic perfection (siddhi); sankhya ends with the immediate realization of the self (atmajñāna); and jñāna ends at the point of liberation (mokṣa). Each of these paths has its respective capacity to bring forth these corresponding results. Consequently, in regard to karma-yoga and the other paths of such nature, the transience (vyabhicāritā) of the associated practices laid down by scripture is understood to be the case. 
In contrast, however, bhakti to Bhagavan Hari has been established by its preeminence of being prescribed for all times and in all places, both by affirmation and negation, and for this reason it is appropriate to refer to it as a limb (anga) of the mystery (rahasya) [of divine love]. As a mystery or secret is confidential, so the intrinsic part of that secret is also confidential. Therefore, sadhana-bhakti has been spoken of in a concealed manner 
699 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
in this verse [SB 2.9.35], covering its true identity in the garb of knowledge (jñāna-rūpa). 
तदेवं श्रीभागवतं सङ्क्षेपेणोपदेक्ष्यन्तं श्रीनारदं श्रीब्रह्मापि तथैव सङ्कल्पं कारितवान् यथा (भा०२/७/५२)- 
Accordingly, Śrī Brahma, while instructing Śri Narada in brief on the principles of the Bhāgavata, made him resolve to propagate the latter precisely in this manner, as stated: 
यथा हरौ भगवति नृणां भक्तिर्भविष्यति । सर्वात्मन्यखिलाधार इति सङ्कल्प्य वर्णय || ३२६ ॥ 
Elucidate this [Śrimad Bhagavata], resolving thus, that by the manner [of your exposition], bhakti to Bhagavān Hari, the Immanent Self of all beings and the ultimate refuge of everything, will come about for all humanity. (SB 2.7.52)64 
भविष्यत्यवश्यं भवेदिति इमं प्रकारं सङ्कल्प्य नियमेनाङ्गीकृत्य || श्रीब्रह्मा नारदम् ॥ 
In the clause yatha bhaktir bhavisyati, "in such a manner that bhakti will come about," the verb bhavisyati means "will certainly come about" (avasyam bhavet). The words iti sankalpya, "resolving thus," mean, "assenting as a manner of principle (niyamena angikṛtya) [to teach] in this way (imam prakāram).” [This may be summed up as follows: "You should elucidate this Śrimad Bhāgavata, assenting as a manner of principle to teach in such a way that humanity will certainly develop bhakti for Bhagavan Hari."] 
Commentary 
To further emphasize the point that bhakti alone is the eternal abhidheya, Śri Jiva Gosvāmī remarks that all other paths - be it karmayoga, jñāna-yoga, or aṣṭanga-yogacome to an end after delivering their respective fruits. Bhakti, however, continues beyond the 
64 
yatha harau bhagavati nṛṇām bhaktir bhavisyati sarvātmany akhilädhära iti sankalpya varnaya 
700 
115 The Essential Primacy of Bhakti As the Abhidheya 
attainment of perfection. Moreover, the other paths are not accessible to all human beings. They each have specific requirements of eligibility that restrict their application. Such, however, is not the case with bhakti, which is universally available. In conclusion, all other paths have clearly defined limits, but bhakti is eternal. Once begun, it never comes to an end. 
Although bhakti is not explicitly mentioned in SB 2.9.35, the words sarvatra and sarvadă cannot be meaningfully applied to any other path. Consequently, by the process of elimination, or in other words, by the principle of the remainder (päriseṣya-nyāya), it is to be understood that the verse is recommending bhakti alone. 
A doubt may be raised in this regard: If bhakti is the abhidheya, why is it not explicitly mentioned in SB 2.9.35? In reply, Śrī Jiva explains that bhakti has not been so mentioned because it is the means to attain prema, which has been described as a confidential mystery (rahasya). Prema is the most highly precious item of all that is obtainable, and just as people keep their valuables hidden, so too prema is carefully concealed so that it may not be disrespected. When something of great value is made cheaply available, people tend to become indifferent toward it. Sadhana-bhakti is referred to in SB 2.9.30 as a limb (anga) of the mystery of prema. The limb or intrinsic part of a great mystery is itself equally mysterious. Bhakti and prema are the same by constitutional nature, the only difference being that prema is love of God in its fully manifest state, while sadhana-bhakti, the means to attain prema, is its incomplete disclosure to the conditioned being who aspires for it. 
Just as the four seed verses that Brahma heard from Bhagavan were about bhakti, so too the instructions that Brahma imparted to his son Narada on the Bhāgavata were also concerned with bhakti. Consequently, he made it clear (in SB 2.7.52) that Narada should elucidate the Bhāgavata in such a manner so as to disclose bhakti and not jñāna or karma. This also validates the fact that the import of SB 2.9.35 is in bhakti, because Brahma passed on to his own son what he received directly from Bhagavan. 
701I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
Next, Śrī Jīva refers to Narada's instruction to Vyasa to expound bhakti, as a result of which the Bhagavata Purana was manifested by him. 
702 
