+++
title = "116"
+++
The Bhāgavata Was Manifested to Facilitate Bhakti - I 
११६ । श्रीनारदेनापि तन् महापुराणाविर्भावनार्थं तथैवोपदिष्टम् (भा० १।५।१३) – 
ŚRĪ NĀRADA in turn instructed Vyasa in precisely the same man- ner with the intent that he should bring forth this Mahāpurāṇa, Srimad Bhagavata: 
अथो महाभाग भवानमोघदृक् शुचिश्रवाः सत्यरतो धृतव्रतः । उरुक्रमस्याखिलबन्धमुक्तये समाधिनानुस्मर तद्विचेष्टितम् ॥ ३२७ ॥ 
Therefore, O greatly fortunate Vyasa, since you are of infallible vision, pure in glory, established in truth, and of firm vows, you should continuously recollect- through transcognitive aware- ness (samadhi) - the divine acts of Bhagavan, who performs extraordinary feats, doing so for the liberation of all living beings from material bondage. (SB 1.5.13)1 
अथो अतः " नैष्कर्म्यमप्यच्युतभाववर्जितम् ” ( भा० १ | ५ | १२) इत्याद्युक्तेः कारणात् । 
The word athaḥ, "therefore," is used in the sense of ataḥ, "for the reason just stated," because this statement is semantically linked to what was just said in the immediately preceding verse, as follows: 
1 
atho maha-bhāga bhavan amogha-drk suci-śravaḥ satya-rato dhṛta-vrataḥ urukramasyäkhila-bandha-muktaye samadhinänusmara tad-vicestitam 
703 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
Even naişkarmya-jñāna, or "the awareness that pertains to the very nature of Brahman," which frees one from all taints (nira- njanam), is inadequately illuminating if devoid of devotional affect (bhava) for Bhagavan Acyuta [Sri Krsna]. What then can be said of motivated action [kamya-karma], which is always inauspicious, or even of unmotivated action (akāraṇam), when not offered to Bhagavan? (SB 1.5.12)2 
अत्र विचेष्टितानुस्मरणेनाखण्डैव भक्तिर्लक्ष्यते ॥ 
In SB 1.5.13, the words, "you should continuously recollect the divine acts of Bhagavan" (viceṣṭitam anusmara) imply uninterrupted devotion (akhanda-bhakti). 
Commentary 
IN THE Conclusion to the previous anuccheda, Śrīla Jiva Gosvāmi cited Brahma's instruction to his son Narada to elucidate the Bhāga- vata in such a manner that bhakti may be attained in this world by suffering humanity. Nārada transmitted that same instruction here to his student Vyāsa. 
In India, traditionally knowledge was transferred from teacher to student. The student was meant to approach the teacher with humility and respect. With this foundation, he would study under the teacher while rendering favorable service to him or her. Out of affection and compassion, the teacher would then reveal the secrets to such a sincere student, as pointed out by Saunaka: 
All of that [which is realized by Vyasa and other sages] is known to you in truth by their grace, O gentle one [Suta], because the spir- itual preceptors reveal even the most confidential secrets to their affectionate student. (SB 1.1.8)3 
naişkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitam na śobhate jñānam alam niranjanam kutaḥ punah sasvad abhadram isvare na carpitam karma yad apy akāraṇam vettha tvam saumya tat sarvam tattvatas tad anugrahat brüyuḥ snigdhasya sisyasya guravo guhyam apy uta 
704 
116 The Bhagavata Was Manifested to Facilitate Bhakti - I 
This manner of imparting knowledge from teacher to student is known as sampradaya, or "sacred tradition." Bhagavan transmitted the four seed verses of Srimad Bhagavata to Brahma, Brahmā taught them to Nārada, who in turn instructed Vyasa. 
In SB 1.5.13, the indeclinable athaḥ, "for the reason just stated," shows the causal connection to the immediately preceding verse (SB 1.5.12), wherein the futility of the paths of both karma and jñāna was impressed on Vyasa. The conclusion to be drawn from this rea- soning is that Vyasa should meditate upon and then describe the līlās of Bhagavan in the form of Srimad Bhagavata, so that humanity may be liberated through bhakti. 
705 
