+++
title = "25 (xxv) TIRUMALA UNDER THE MAHANTS OF TIRUPATI"
+++

With the decline of the Vijayanagar Empire, there is a dearth of inscriptions in the Temple. When the British established themselves in South India, they took over the management of all the temples within their territorial jurisdiction in 1801 A.D., and credited the income under the general revenues of the State. Later on, during the middle of the 19th century, when they desired to relinquish their connection with the religious institutions, they conferred the administration of the temple of Sri Venkatesvara, together with those of Tirupati and Tiruchanur to the then Mahant Sri Sevadasuji of Sri Hathiramji Muth in 1843 A.D. through a sanad from the Collector of the North Arcot District. 

When the management of these temples thus passed into the hands of the Mahants of Sri Hathiramji-Matha, they as Vicharanakartas thereof under- took the renovation of the temples and other ancient structures and added to them from time to time. No. 350 - T.T. records such a renovation of the Svami-Pushkarini, stated to contain nine tirthas in it, by Maharaja-raja-Sri Sevadasu, Sri Mahant of Hathiramji Matha, in Saka 1771, Saumya, Bhadrapada (31-8-1849 A.D.), and his renewing the Jalakeli-Mantapotsava, Another inscription in Telugu engraved in mortar over the Mukha-mantapam of Sri Venkatesvara's temple mentions the repairs effected to certain portions of the temple by the same Mahant Sevadasuji. No. 283—G.T. is a tablet put upon the brindavanam raised over the remains of this Mahant who is stated to have been the sishya of Sri Anabhihananda, by his own disciple and successor Sri Mahant Dharmadasuji in the cyclic year Raktakshi, Magha (=2-2-1865 A.D.). The same Mahant Dharmadasuji is reported in No. 209 - G.T. to have renovated the Pushkarini known as Kapila-tirtham and its surrounding mantapams in the same month Magha (10-2-1865 A.D.), and to have constructed the outer gopura of the temple at Ritumala called the Padikavalı- gopuram, as also certain other mantapams so as to please Seshagirisa (Venkatesa abiding on the serpent-like hill), in Bahudhanya, Bhadrapada (11-9-1878 A.D.) (No. 382 - T.T.). The latest record of the temple epigraphs is No. 242 - T.T. which registers the fixing of the kanaka-kalasa (golden vase) over the vimana of Sri Venkatesvara's central shrine by Ramalakshmanadasa, a brother-disciple of Sri Mahanta Prayagadasa, the then Vicharanakarta of the Devasthanams in Kilaka, Asvayuja (30-9-1908 A.D.). 

81

