+++
title = "002"
+++
Sammukhyatā in the Form of Bhajana 
Is the Abhidheya 
२। किं च (भा० २१२१६) - 
ADDITIONALLY, in the following statement of Sri Sukadeva [the turning of one's regard toward the Absolute (tat sāmmukhya) in the form of bhajana is disclosed as the means (abhidheya)]: 
एवं स्वचित्ते स्वत एव सिद्ध आत्मा प्रियोऽर्थो भगवाननन्तः । तं निर्वृतो नियतार्थो भजेत संसारहेतूपरमश्च यत्र ॥ ९ ॥ 
[Being thus fixed in nonattachment to phenomena,] having one's intentful regard resolutely focused on Him, and being absorbed in the bliss of the immediate experience of Him, one should worship Bhagavan, who is immanently self-existent within the interiority of one's own consciousness, who is the Self, the most beloved, ontologically real, and eternal. It is through such worship (bhajana) that the cause of material bondage [avidyā] automatically ceases. (SB 2.2.6) 1 
टीका च - “तदा तेन किं कर्तव्यम् ? हरिस्तु सेव्य इत्याह एवं विरक्तः सन् तं भजेत' । भजनीयत्वे हेतवः 'स्वचित्ते स्वत एव सिद्धः । यत आत्मा अत एव प्रियः । प्रियस्य च सेवा सुखरूपैव । अर्थः सत्यः । न त्वनात्मवन् मिथ्या । भगवान् भजनीयगुणश्च अनन्तश्च नित्यः । य एवम्भूतस्तं भजेत । 
I 
1 evam sva-citte svata eva siddha ātmā priyo'rtho bhagavan anantaḥ 
tam nirvrto niyatartho bhajeta samsara-hetuparamaś ca yatra 
2 Sammukhyatā in the Form of Bhajana Is the Abhidheya 
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments as follows on this verse: "Then what is to be done by a person [who has understood that ultimate value is not to be attained through the pursuit of material enjoyment]? In response, Sukadeva asserts that it is Bhagavan Hari who is worthy of our heedful service [and not the body]. The word evam, 'in this manner,' [referring to the previous verses] means 'being thus fixed in nonattachment' (virakta), one should worship Bhagavan. The grounds for acknowledging Bhagavan as the entity who is truly worthy of our adoration (bhajana) are stated in the verse: He is immanently self-existent within the interiority of one's own consciousness (sva-citte svata eva siddhah), for He is the Self (ātmā). As such, He is the most beloved (priyah), and service to one who is dear is indeed pleasing. He is the truly abiding substantive (arthaḥ), meaning that He is ontologically real (satyah), and not false like the non-self (anātmā). He is Bhagavan, meaning that He is replete with qualities that establish Him as worthy of worship. Furthermore, He is without end (anantaḥ), meaning that He is eternal (nityah). Because He is intrinsically self-endowed with such characteristics, one is meant to worship Him. 
नियतार्थश्च निश्चितस्वरूपः । तदनुभवानन्देन निर्वृतः सन्निति भक्तेः स्वतः सुखात्मकत्वं दर्शितम् । किं च यत्र यस्मिन् भजने सति संसारहेतोरविद्याया उपरमो नाशो भवति इत्येषा । अत्र चकारात् तत्प्राप्तिर्ज्ञेया ॥ श्रीशुकः ॥ 
"The compound niyatärthaḥ, 'with fixed intent,' means that one's disposition should be decisively focused (niścit-svarupa), and [being immersed in such bhajana,] one is naturally joyful (nirvṛtah), because of the bliss of the immediate experience of Bhagavan. This demonstrates that bhakti is intrinsically of the nature of delight. Moreover, 'in this matter' (yatra), meaning 'by this worship,' ignorance (avidya), which is the cause of material bondage, automatically ceases or is dissolved." [Here ends Śrīdhara Svāmi's comment.] 
In this verse, the word ca, "also," implies the attainment of Bhagavan [in addition to the dissolution of ignorance]. 
31Commentary 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
THE PRESENT VERSE is spoken by Śrī Sukadeva Gosvāmī to King Parikṣit as a recommendation to worship Bhagavan. In the preceding verses, he had described the futility of material pleasures. On hearing the advice to worship Bhagavan, a conditioned human being may feel as if he or she is being coerced to do so. Such a person may be inclined to seek out some other way to overcome ignorance and suffering. This type of resistance is commonplace, because the condition of having one's regard directed away from God (vaimukhyam), rooted in the prior absence of awareness of Him, is the very cause of our material existence. 
The human mind is loath to change, especially if it requires giving up the ego and the false sense of independence. Every conditioned being is beginninglessly oriented in this way, and thus, it seems to be a part of our very nature. As a consequence, we are not inclined to surrender and worship. Surrender appears to be foreign to our nature, and thus, we experience an instinctive resistance toward it. In reality, however, this resistance results from the superimposition of an acquired identity upon the true self, and as such it is our basic disease. 
If a person comes to the point of intuiting that this condition is not our constitutional state, it indicates that his psyche has already been impacted by beneficial association in this or a past life. The tenacity of our aversion toward surrender and worship only reflects the perilous nature of our diseased condition. Just as a person suffering from fever loses his taste for food, so too a person under the influence of maya is disinclined to embrace a devotional disposition in regard to Bhagavan. In this anuccheda, through reference to SB 2.2.6 and Śrīdhara Svāmi's commentary, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi points out the grounds for determining Bhagavan as the entity who is truly worthy of our worship (bhajaniyatva). In doing so, he also demonstrates that the reverential turning of regard toward Bhagavan (i.e., bhajana) is the most natural engagement for all living beings. The following points are made based on the words of the verse: 
32 
2 Sammukhyatā in the Form of Bhajana Is the Abhidheya 
1. Bhagavan is always already immediately available. No extraneous effort is required to find Him, for He is immanently selfexistent in one's own heart (sva-citte svata eva siddhaḥ). One does not have to go anywhere else to worship Him. He is the closest person to us. 
2. Bhagavan is our very Self (ātmā). This means that we cannot exist without Him, just as we cannot survive without the lifebreath. Thus, He is naturally dear to us, being the source of our existence, the very Self of the self. 
3. He is both loving and beloved (priya). If, in spite of possessing 
the above qualities, He did not have a loving disposition, it would be drudgery to worship Him. He reciprocates in love, and that is the most wonderful quality He possesses. 4. Bhagavan is the truly abiding substantive (artha), which means that He is ontologically real (satya). This signifies that He is unchanging throughout all phases of time. In this material world, we direct our love toward people, animals, or objects, all of which are subject to change and eventual passing away. Moreover, we may come to realize that they are not what we thought them to be. Such is not the case with Bhagavan. Since He is both real and unchanging, love directed toward Him attains the highest unceasing fulfillment. 
5. He is Bhagavan. In Bhagavat Sandarbha (Anuccheda 3), the word bhagavan was shown to refer to that entity who is intrinsically self-endowed with controlling potency, inconceivable power, fame, wealth, knowledge, and detachment. People are naturally attracted to anyone who has any one of these qualities or a few of them in combination. Bhagavan has all of these qualities naturally and unlimitedly. He can never be deprived of them. In the material world, people may have some of these qualities, but they are always limited and temporary. Nobody is eternally beautiful or wealthy. Even higher beings, like Brahma or Śiva, do not possess such qualities independent of Bhagavan. He is the ultimate source of the devas (GĪTĀ 10.2, 10.8). 6. Bhagavan is unlimited (ananta), which Śrīdhara Svāmi glosses as "eternal." This signifies that He is beyond time and space. That Bhagavan is unlimited means that He can reciprocate simultaneously with an unlimited number of devotees. We do not have 
33 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
to compete or be jealous of others. Jealousy is a common feature in material relations because of people's limited resources or limited capacity to reciprocate. 
Since Bhagavan is inherently endowed with all these qualities, it is concluded that surrender to and worship of Him naturally establishes one in the state of permanent bliss. We certainly aspire for peace, happiness, and love from all our life endeavors, but we rarely attain them. Material hankering is itself a disturbance to the mind (SB 11.8.44). We feel peaceful and refreshed after a sound sleep, simply because it is devoid of all thoughts and desires. Not only is desire troublesome, but it also ends in suffering. If the desire is fulfilled, we develop attachment to the object of desire and suffer from that. If, on the other hand, the desire is not fulfilled, we suffer from frustration. The second form of suffering is easy to grasp, but the first type requires deeper deliberation, because at face value, it appears to be pleasure. In this regard, Śrī Kṛṣṇa makes the following categorical statement: 
O son of Kunti, all enjoyments born of sense contacts are only sources of misery, having a beginning and an end. Therefore, the wise do not indulge in them. (GĪTĀ 5.22)2 
Bhagavan is also sometimes referred to as Kamadeva, or "the Master of all desires." He is also "the one existent who fulfills the desires of the many" - eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān (Katha Upanisad 2.2.13). If one becomes devoted to Him, all one's aspirations are completely fulfilled. Krsna confirms this fact to Uddhava: 
2 
3 
My devotee easily attains all things through devotion to Me. Should he somehow desire them, he can attain even heaven, liberation, or residence in My abode. (SB 11.20.33)3 
ye hi samsparsa-jā bhogā duḥkha-yonaya eva te ady-antavantaḥ kaunteya na tesu ramate budhah sarvam mad-bhakti-yogena mad-bhakto labhate ríjasa svargāpavarge mad-dhama kathañcid yadi vāñchati 
34 
2 Sammukhyata in the Form of Bhajana Is the Abhidheya 
Devotion to Bhagavan is itself bliss and love and thus the highest goal of life, the ultimate puruşartha. This will be elaborated in the sixth book of this series, Priti Sandarbha. From the above discussion, it is clearly understood that such devotion to Bhagavan brings an end to all ignorance, suffering, and bondage. Bhakti is the path to true irrevocable freedom. 
When one attains love for Bhagavan, he is blessed with the direct experience of Him, both within and without. A spiritual aspirant who recognizes and has faith in this truth would certainly strive to direct his or her intentful regard toward Bhagavan. It is for this reason that sastra first enlightens us about Bhagavan (through sambandha-jñāna) and then explicitly implores us to take to the path of devotion as the means (abhidheya). 
In the next anuccheda, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī establishes bhakti as the preeminent means of sammukhya. To do so, he refers to Suta Gosvāmi's reply to Saunaka Rṣi. He continues to develop this theme throughout the following eighteen anucchedas. 
35 
35 
336 
