+++
title = "007"
+++
Absolute Reality Is Disclosed Only by Bhakti 
७ । तच्च त्रिधाविर्भावयुक्तमेव तत्त्वं भक्त्यैव साक्षादपि क्रियत इत्याह (भा० ११२ ११२ ) - 
THE ABSOLUTE (tattva), which comprehends the above-mentioned three manifestations, is directly self-disclosed only by bhakti. In this regard, Suūta Gosvami says: 
तच्छ्रद्दधाना मुनयो ज्ञानवैराग्ययुक्तया । 
पश्यन्त्यात्मनि चात्मानं भक्त्या श्रुतगृहीतया ॥ १७ ॥ 
The sages who are endowed with resolute faith [in that Absolute], directly perceive that very [nondual Reality ], the Self, within their own self by bhakti invested with immediate awareness [of Bhagavan] and detachment, which has been imbibed through hearing [the self-revealed truth teachings]. (SB 1.2.12 ) 1 
भक्त्या तत्कथारुचेरेव परावस्थारूपया प्रेमलक्षणया । तत् पूर्वमेवोक्तं तत्त्वम् । आत्मनि शुद्धे चेतसि पश्यन्ति च - ज्ञानमात्रस्य का वार्ता साक्षादपि कुर्वन्तीत्यर्थः । कीदृशं तत् ? आत्मानं स्वरूपाख्यजीवाख्यमायाख्यशक्तीनामाश्रयम् । ज्ञानवैराग्ययुक्तया स्वात्मजाभ्यां ताभ्यां सेवितया । अत एव च ते मुनयः पृथक् च विशिष्टं च स्वेच्छया पश्यन्तीत्यायाति । तदेवम् “ श्रुतगृहीतया” "मुनयः” “श्रद्दधानाः” इति पदत्रयेण तस्या एव भक्तेर्दोर्लभ्यं दर्शितम् । 
The word bhaktyā, "by bhakti," means by devotion characterized as divine love (prema) in the form of the supreme condition of taste for hearing His topics. The pronoun tat, “that,” refers to 
1 tac chraddadhanā munayo jnana-vairagya-yuktayā 
pasyanty atmani catmānam bhaktyä śruta-grhitayā 
82 
7 Absolute Reality Is Disclosed Only by Bhakti 
the Absolute (tattva) spoken of in the previous verse. They see that tattva "within their own self" (ätmani), meaning, "in their pure awareness." This seeing is not a matter of mere knowledge, rather they directly cognize the Absolute. This is the sense. 
How is the Absolute then defined? It is "the Self" (ātmānam), meaning that It is the existential ground and support of all potencies, designated as His intrinsic potency (svarupaśakti), His intermediary potency, the conscious living beings (jivas), and His extrinsic potency (māyā). The phrase "invested with immediate awareness and detachment" (jñāna-vairagyayuktayā) [qualifying the word bhakti] means that bhakti is served by her two offspring - knowledge and detachment. 
It is thus understood that in accordance with their own intent, the sages directly perceive the Absolute either as consciousness alone devoid of Its potencies or as endowed with Its various potencies. By use of the three terms, śruta-grhitaya, “imbibed through hearing [the self-revealed truth teachings]," munayah, "the sages," and śraddadhānāḥ, "endowed with resolute faith," the rarity of this specific bhakti is shown. 
सद्गुरोः सकाशाद् वेदान्ताद्यखिलशास्त्रार्थविचारश्रवणद्वारा यदि सा (भक्तिः) आवश्यकपरमकर्तव्यत्वेन ज्ञायते पुनश्च ( भा० २।२।३४ ) – 
भगवान् ब्रह्म कार्त्स्न्येन त्रिरन्वीक्ष्य मनीषया । 
तदध्यवस्यत् कूटस्थो रतिरात्मन् यतो भवेत् ॥ १८ ॥ 
इतिवद् यदि विपरीतभावनात्याजकौ मननयोग्यतामननाभिनिवेशौ स्यातां ततः श्रद्दधानैश्च सा भक्तिरुपासनद्वारा लभ्यते इति । 
The sense is that bhakti can be attained through worship (upāsana) by those endowed with resolute faith (śraddadhānāḥ), if by hearing and deliberating upon the meaning of all scriptures beginning with Vedanta, received from an authentic spiritual teacher, bhakti is unequivocally understood to be the supreme duty, and furthermore if the capacity for deliberation (manana) and the absorption in such reflection are such that 
83 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
all contrary thoughts are dispelled. This is illustrated in the following verse: 
After thrice studying and deliberating upon the entire corpus of the Vedas, the venerable Brahma, who was of one-pointed intellectual resolve, ascertained through his faculty of discernment that by which love for the Self [Sri Hari] is evoked. (SB 2.2.34)2 
अतः श्रुतिरपि तदर्थमागृह्णाति " आत्मा वा अरे द्रष्टव्यः श्रोतव्यो मन्तव्यो निदिध्यासितव्यो मैत्रेयि (बृ० २।४।५) इत्यत्र निदिध्यासनमुपासनम् । दर्शनं साक्षात्कार उच्यते ॥ 
Therefore, the Śruti also stresses this point: 
The Self, my dear Maitreyī, is to be seen, heard, contemplated, and meditated upon. (BAU 2.4.5) 
Here the word nididhyāsana, "meditation," means "worship" (upāsanā), and darśana, "seeing," means "direct witnessing" (sākṣātkāra). 
Commentary 
AFTER affirming that the purpose of human life is to realize the tattva, which is self-disclosed as Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān, Śrī Sūta specifies the means for attaining such realization. The word ātmānam, "the Self," in SB 1.2.12, refers primarily to Bhagavan, as can be understood from the etymological meaning of the word ātmā: "Due to being all-pervading (atatvät) and the matrix of all being (mātṛtvät), the Universal Self (ātmā) is indeed the Supreme Being, Śrī Hari.”4 
5 
In this connection, Śrī Jīva glosses the word ātmā as the existential ground and support (asraya) of the three potencies that are intrinsic to Bhagavan Because, however, it was established in 
bhagavan brahma kärtsnyena trir-anviksya manisaya tad-adhyavasyat kutastho ratir atman yato bhavet 
ātmā vă are draṣṭavyah śrotavyo mantavyo nididhyāsitavyo maitreyi *ātatvāt ca mātṛtvāt ātmā hi paramo hariḥ 
5 
The three categories of Bhagavan's potencies are elaborately described in Bhagavat Sandarbha, Anuccheda 16. 
84 
7 Absolute Reality Is Disclosed Only by Bhakti 
the immediately preceding verse (SB 1.2.11) that the tattva is designated as Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavan, the word ātmā can refer to all three manifestations. Accordingly, the word munayah, "the sages" (in SB 1.2.12), can be understood to refer to the three corresponding varieties of realized practitioners, namely, the jñānīs, yogis, and bhaktas. Bearing this in mind, Suta's statement thus implies that the tattva is self-disclosed to all three categories of realizers - each according to their respective faithonly through bhakti, which begins with a taste for hearing about Vasudeva (katha-ruci). For all these practitioners, and the devotees in particular, true knowledge and detachment come into being as a consequence of bhakti, which begins with such hearing. For this reason, knowledge and detachment are described as bhakti's children. 
Bhakti, however, is exceedingly rare, as implied by the three terms used in SB 1.2.12. The first of these is śruta-grhitaya, modifying bhakti. This means that bhakti is imbibed by hearing; one must hear or study sastra from a qualified teacher. Ordinarily, people are of the opinion that there is no need to accept a guru and study the śăstra assiduously under his guidance. They think that one can read books independently and derive one's own conclusion. This is, after all, the age of the internet and "do-it-yourself" mentality. But for any field of serious and complex study, this approach is fundamentally flawed. 
If one aspires to be a champion swimmer or tennis player, one has to undergo intensive personal training from a qualified coach. Or if one seeks mastery in classical music, it is essential to submit to years of rigorous training from a skilled and authentic teacher. In this regard, one has to both study the theory of music and practice it. This can happen only when a genuine interest is awoken on hearing beautiful music and being spontaneously drawn to its expression. Without a profound interest, nobody takes to any subject seriously. For this reason, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi concludes that kathā-ruci is the beginning of bhakti. 
The primary reason why bhakti is rarely attained is that people are not prepared to undergo the requisite process. It is commonly 
85 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
advertised that bhakti is very simple and easy to practice. Although this is true in a general sense, bhakti in its essential nature as the intrinsic potency of Bhagavan can be entered into authentically only by one in whom a taste for hearing (ruci) has been born. This condition, however, is not very common, since humanity's general regard is diverted elsewhere. People's prior experiences are related only to activities other than bhakti. To take to a process about which one has no prior experience is not appealing to one's heart. 
Additionally, the situation is further complicated by the fact that qualified teachers are also rare. Even if such a teacher is available, one may not find the time to study and practice under his or her guidance. And even if one is fortunate enough that all these conditions are met, one may still not have acquired sufficient interest or taste to undertake such a genuinely transformative practice. After some time, one may simply lose interest and pursue other things. If, however, a person has developed taste, then he or she becomes firmly rooted in Reality and will be able to surmount all obstacles on the path. 
The major obstacle is doubt. In the study of any philosophical system, doubts are bound to arise, because one is without any immediate experience of the subject being described, and because the reality thus signified is inconsonant with the entire range of one's past experiences. There are three types of doubt in this regard: 
1. That of impossibility: What is being taught is thought to be 
impossible. 
2. That of contradiction: The truth is perceived as just the opposite 
of what is being taught. 
3. That of difference: The truth is conjectured as different from 
what is being taught. 
One may also doubt one's own capacity to progress on the path, either because the path seems unsuited to one's nature or because the end state appears to be beyond reach. To overcome doubt, faith (śraddha) is of the utmost importance. Faith is not mere belief but an immediate intuitive resonance with the self-disclosure of truth. 
86 
7 Absolute Reality Is Disclosed Only by Bhakti 
Faith is in fact the precondition for such a disclosure. To emphasize this point, the modifier śraddadhānāḥ, "endowed with resolute faith," has been used in the verse to specify the internal disposition of the sages (munayah) who directly cognize the Self. Faith is attained by the grace of a realized teacher. Without faith, one will discontinue the process, as pointedly affirmed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa: 
One who is ignorant, devoid of faith, and whose heart is seized by doubt is ruined. For the self who is afflicted by doubt, neither this world, nor the world beyond, nor happiness truly exist. (GĪTĀ 4.40) 
When one is rooted in faith, he will deliberate on the teachings that have been heard or studied and his doubts will be resolved through a process of intuitive intellection. The word munayah is also significant in this regard. A muni literally means "a thinker" (manana-sila) but is taken here more in the sense of "one grounded in reflection." Without faith, one will arrive at judgements through a limited and conventional frame of reference and thus come to conclusions that are not in correspondence with the transrational truth. Faith without deliberation, however, leads only to the suppression of doubt. Without study and reflection, a person's faith will be unable to mature in depth and complexity, and thus it will remain merely conventional, degrading at worst into blind following and even fanaticism. 
To show the importance of reflecting on linguistically formulated truth, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi offers the example of Brahma, who heard the Vedas from Bhagavan directly. After hearing, he deliberated on them three times, in hierarchically ordered modes of consideration. He first studied the Vedas from the karma point of view, then from the jñāna point of view, and finally from the bhakti perspective. After this threefold deliberation, he concluded that the Vedas'ultimate message culminates in rati for the Self (atman). The word rati here is a synonym for prema-bhakti. The word atman in 
6 
ajñas caśraddadhanaś ca samsayatma vinasyati 
nayam loko'sti na paro na sukham samsayatmanaḥ 
87 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
this verse (SB 2.2.34) is to be understood as being in the locative case, "in, or for, the Self, or Bhagavan." 
us, 
It is significant that Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi cites a verse relating the experience of Brahmã, to whom the Vedic knowledge was revealed directly by Bhagavan. If even a being of such elevated stature was required to study and reflect on the meaning of what was received, then how much more must this be so in our case? Fortunately for Śrīla Jiva Gosvāmī has deliberated in similar fashion on the message of the Vedas as a whole and in particular on that of Srimad Bhāgavata. He has presented the conclusion of such comprehensive and penetrating reflection in the form of the Sat Sandarbhas. Anyone who is serious about undertaking a determined inquiry into the Absolute is positively advised to study this work. This is the implied meaning behind the analogy of Brahma. 
Sometimes in the overall approach to the cultivation of bhakti, undue emphasis is placed on "remembrance" (smarana), especially lila-smarana. But without authentic hearing (śravana), there can be no remembrance (smarana). To underline the importance of this principle, Sūta uses the compound śruta-grhitaya, "imbibed through hearing," as a modifier for bhakti. This indeed is the standard Vedic approach to the realization of the Absolute, as summarized in Yajnavalkya's statement from the Bṛhad-aranyaka Upanisad (2.4.5) with which Jiva Gosvāmi concludes this anuccheda. 
The schools of Indian philosophy are called darśanas (lit., "seeing"), because their intent is to disclose the means by which the tattva may be directly perceived (drastavya). This involves three steps. The first is hearing or studying under the guidance of an authentic teacher (śrotavya). Next, one must deliberate on the teachings received so as to clearly identify and see through all holding patterns of doubt (mantavya). After gaining a sound understanding of the truth to be known (sambandha), the means of its realization (abhidheya), and the completion state to be attained (prayojana), one should engage in sadhana in the form of worship (upāsanā) or meditation (nididhyāsitavya). The tattva is to be seen (draṣṭavya) specifically through this mode of self-disclosure. There is no shortcut to this process. 
88 
7 Absolute Reality Is Disclosed Only by Bhakti 
In rare individuals, it may be observed that immediate seeing is spontaneously awoken without the need to follow this progression. In such cases, it is to be inferred that such persons have undertaken these steps in past lives. For some reason, they were unable to complete the process in the previous life and are born again from the point of realization at which they left off. Alternatively, attainment of the end state of divine love may occur to an individual who has received extraordinary grace (ati-prasādottha) from Bhagavan even without undergoing the standard process, as mentioned in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.4)? 
Although bhakti is rare, it can be attained even by executing one's dharma for the pleasure of Bhagavan. To offer such encouragement, Śrī Sūta speaks the next verse. 
7 
mamatanya-mamatvena varjitety atra yojana bhāvottho'ti prasādotthaḥ śri harer iti sa dvidha 
89 
