+++
title = "011"
+++
Mahat-sevä Leads to a Taste for Hearing 
११ । नन्वेवमपि तस्य कथारुचिर्मन्दभाग्यानां च न जायत इत्याशङ्क्य तत्र सुगमोपाय वदन् तामारभ्य नैष्ठिकीपर्यन्तां भक्तिमुपदिशति पञ्चभिः (भा० १।२।१६) – 
A DOUBT may be raised in this regard. In spite of the fact that the knot of karma is easily slashed by hearing the narrations of Bhagavan, the taste for such katha may not arise in those who are less fortunate. Considering this possibility, Sūta Gosvāmī offers an easy method that leads to the appearance of taste. In five verses, he delineates the progression of bhakti, beginning from the taste ( ruci ) for such kathā up to naisthiki bhakti, or "fixity in devotion": 
शुश्रूषोः श्रद्दधानस्य वासुदेवकथारुचिः । 
स्यान् महत्सेवया विप्राः पुण्यतीर्थनिषेवणात् ॥ २२ ॥ 
O learned ones, by pilgrimage to a holy place, the opportunity to associate with and attend to highly realized devotees becomes possible. By such service, a person is blessed with faith [in the truth teachings and practices of such devotees], which occasions an interest in hearing the narrations of Bhagavan. This in turn gives rise to a taste for such narrations. (SB 1.2.16)1 
“भुवि पुरुपुण्यतीर्थसदनान्यृषयो विमदाः” (भा० १० ८७।३५) इत्याद्यनुसारेण “प्रायस्तत्रैव सङ्गो भवति” इति तदीयटीकानुमत्या च पुण्यतीर्थनिषेवणाद्धेतोर्लब्धा यदृच्छया या महत्सेवा तया वासुदेवकथारुचिः स्यात् । 
1 
susrüsoḥ śraddadhanasya vasudeva-katha-ruciḥ 
syan mahat-sevaya viprah punya-tirtha-niṣevanät 
101I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
In Srimad Bhāgavata it is said, "The sages who are divested of all pride reside in hermitages in the many holy places present on earth" (SB 10.87.35)? Śrīdhara Svāmi concurs with this statement in his commentary: "Generally, the association of sages is obtained only in such holy places." In accordance with this statement and its comment, by residence in or pilgrimage to the holy places, one may obtain the association of a highly realized devotee through divine dispensation (yadṛcchaya). Then by attendance to such an elevated being, a taste for hearing Vasudevakatha is born in the ātmā. 
I 
कार्यान्तरेणापि तीर्थे भ्रमतो महतां प्रायस्तत्र भ्रमतां तिष्ठतां वा दर्शनस्पर्शनसम्भाषणादिलक्षणा सेवा स्वत एव सम्पद्यते । तत्प्रभावेण च तदीयाचरणे श्रद्धा भवति । तदीयस्वाभाविकपरस्परभगवत्कथायां किमेते सङ्कथयन्ति ? तत् शृणोमीति तदिच्छा जायते । तच्छ्रवणेन च तस्यां रुचिर्जायत इति । तथा च महद्भ्य एव श्रुता झटिति कार्यकरीति 
भावः । 
Even if one should travel to a holy place for some other purpose, the opportunity to see, come in contact with, or talk to realized devotees, who generally visit or reside there, presents itself of its own accord, and these actions all constitute a type of attendance (seva). By the influence of such service, one develops faith in the character and conduct of such devotees. From the appearance of faith, one begins to think, "What are they discussing? I would like to hear," and in this manner, a desire is aroused to hear the discussions about Bhagavan that naturally spring forth in their midst. As a consequence of hearing their talks, a taste (ruci) for them is born. Moreover, the effect is immediate only when one hears from highly realized devotees. This is the sense of the above verse. 
तथा च श्रीकपिलदेववाक्यम् "सतां प्रसङ्गान् मम वीर्यसंविदो भवन्ति हृत्कर्णरसायनाः कथाः " ( भा० ३।२५।२३ ) इत्यादि ॥ 
Śri Kapiladeva makes a similar statement: 
2 bhuvi puru-punya-tirtha-sadanany rṣayo vimadaḥ 
102 
11 Mahat-sevā Leads to a Taste for Hearing 
In the association of authentic devotees, the discussions (kathā) naturally come to focus upon Me [Bhagavan]. Such discussions are not only laden with full awareness of My unlimited majesty, but they serve too as inebriating tonic for both the ear and the heart. By service and attention to such discussions, faith, spiritual attraction, and divine love quickly and successively unfold for Me [Bhagavan Hari], the very embodiment of the path of liberation. (SB 3.25.25)3 
Commentary 
BHAKTI is a specific functional capacity of Bhagavan's intrinsic potency, and as such, it belongs to Him alone. By His causeless grace, He invests this potency into His devotees, who can then transmit it to other living beings by the same power of grace. Without the grace of a devotee or Bhagavan, bhakti cannot make its appearance within the ātmā. In this regard, since Bhagavan is not manifest to people in general except when He descends into the material world as an avatara, His direct grace is scarcely available. Consequently, at all other times, when there is no manifest avatāra on earth, bhakti is available only through the grace of a devotee. 
The devotees' grace has no specific cause, because they are not in need of anything material. Their grace usually comes about through the medium of hearing their words and rendering some form of personal service to them. This grace is first transmitted in the form of faith, śraddha, appearing in those who receive their grace. Initially, this faith is directed toward the very same devotees whose presence and teachings originally gave birth to it. One is then struck with the feeling that such realized devotees are exceptional human beings, and one is drawn to associate with them, listen to what they say, and render service to them. In the beginning of śraddha's appearance, there is a simple liking to be in the presence of such devotees - to observe their behavior and listen to 
3 
satām prasangan mama virya-samvido bhavanti hrt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani śraddha ratir bhaktir anukramisyati 
103 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
them speak. A genuine appreciation for them is thereby instilled. This is the beginning point of bhakti. 
To facilitate the possibility of meeting such living saints, the founders of Vedic culture prescribed pilgrimages to holy places, such as Vrindavan, Jagannath Puri, Haridwar, Kurukshetra, Kashi, Ayodhya, Ujjain, Tirupati, and so on. 
Devotees commonly reside in temples and asramas in these holy places. Thus, by visiting such places, an ordinary person is given the opportunity to see devotees and hear them speak. In India, it is customary to go and visit a saintly person for darśana. Sometimes saintly people take it upon themselves to travel just to extend the opportunity to others of contacting spiritual truth. 
There are also numerous religious festivals, such as the Kumbha Mela, where saintly people and ascetics congregate and give discourses. The Kumbha Mela was and still is like a spiritual supermarket. The real purpose behind such festivals is to give the ordinary individual a chance to meet a variety of saints all in one place, each following their own respective sādhanas. 
In the past, traveling was not an easy task, since for most it meant walking. It could also be quite dangerous because of the many ferocious animals inhabiting the Indian forests, and on account of murderers and thieves in the wild, who were even more dangerous. Even up to fifty years ago, very few people were able to make pilgrimages to the holy places mentioned above. Sometimes relatives would cry when a member of the family decided to go on pilgrimage, because no one could be sure whether or not he would return alive. Indeed, many people journeyed to holy places with the specific intent of giving up the body. When, however, someone returned from a pilgrimage, the people of the village would flock to hear about his adventures and about the holy places and the sadhus residing there. 
Once the seed of faith is planted in a person's heart by the grace of a devotee, this faith impels him or her to seek further association with that devotee. Through continued association, one's faith is augmented, and one becomes inclined to offer service, śuśrūṣā. The common meaning of the word suśruşă is "service," but literally 
104 
11 Mahat-sevă Leads to a Taste for Hearing 
it means "the will to hear." The word has come to mean "service," because hearing is the beginning of service and the basis of further service. By hearing and serving regularly, a taste (ruci) for the narrations of Bhagavan is naturally aroused. Correspondingly, one's doubts are gradually dispelled, and faith is then evoked in the truth revelation of scripture. This is called śastriya-śraddha, or "scriptural faith." One in whom this faith is instilled has a firm footing on the path of bhakti. 
There is also a different category of śraddha that is merely conventional, connected with one's birth in a particular family or community. It is not rooted in scripture but in public opinion, which may even contradict scriptural truth. This is called prākṛtaor laukika-śraddha, “customary or worldly faith," referring to a belief or conviction that has not undergone scrutiny. This is the faith referred to by Arjuna in his question to Kṛṣṇa: 
O Kṛṣṇa, what is the conviction of those who, although endowed with faith, engage in worship while discarding the injunctions of scripture? Is it of the nature of sattva, rajas, or tamas? (GĪTĀ 17.1)* 
Kṛṣṇa responds by explaining that all human beings have some type of faith based upon their individual psychology and acquired nature. In this sense, faith is not mere belief in something that cannot be empirically validated, as is commonly understood. Rather, faith is whatever one takes to be real in accordance with one's selfconcept and worldview. It is not only spiritualists or the religious minded who have faith, since in this broader application of the word even scientists and atheists are shown to have some kind of 
faith. 
Scientists have faith inmeaning that they accept as realonly that which can be measured or quantified. Any other method of knowing is discounted in advance. Similarly, atheists have firm faith in the nonexistence of God. Yet no one has proven conclusively that God does not exist, nor can such a thing ever be proven through logic or empirical methods. 
4 
ye śästra-vidhim utsrjya yajante śraddhayanvitaḥ teṣāṁ nisthā tu kā kṛṣṇa sattvam aho rajas tamaḥ 
105 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
The atheists' faith is rooted in scientific theories, or formal logic, or both. This atheistic faith, being a negative entity (i.e., faith in the negation of God's existence), is not conclusively verifiable, whereas the immediate perception of Bhagavan is accessible, and hence verifiable, by replicating attentively the appropriate procedure outlined in sastra. 
Returning to Suta Gosvāmi's statement (SB 1.2.16), what is being described is the progression leading to taste (ruci) in hearing, developing successively through association, faith, and an interest to hear. In this regard, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi comments that if one hears from the mouth of a highly realized devotee, a mahā-bhāgavata, then the effect can be experienced immediately. Accordingly, it should be added that hearing directly is more effective than listening to a recorded talk. 
The word tirtha from the verse can also be taken in the sense of a spiritual teacher or guru, as confirmed in Amara-kośa, "The word tirtha means a well, scripture, a site of holy water frequented by a sage, and a spiritual teacher" (nipānāgamayos tirtham rsi-juste jale gurau, 3.3.86). The compound punya-tirtha-niṣevanät would then mean that by first listening to an authentic guru (punya-tirtha), faith is awakened, which leads to further hearing and service. This then results in a taste for hearing the narrations of Bhagavan. 
In the next verse, Śrī Sūta describes the effect of hearing Kṛṣṇakatha with faith from a devotee. 
106 
