+++
title = "0120"
+++
Bhagavan's Supremacy Is Due to Imparting Bhakti 
१२० । अशेषोपदेष्टुरपि तदुपदेशेनैव भगवतः परम उत्कर्ष उच्यते । यथा “जितमजित तदा भवता यदाह भागवतं धर्ममनवद्यम् ” ( भा० ६ । १६ । ४० ) इति । 
ALTHOUGH BHAGAVAN is the instructor of all, His supreme eminence (parama-utkarsa) is spoken of only by dint of His imparting instructions on bhakti. Citraketu expressed this to Bhagavan Sri Sankarṣana: "O Invincible Lord [Ajita], You became established in supreme eminence [jitam, i.e., paramotkarṣeṇa sthitam]' when You spoke this irreproachable bhāgavata-dharma" (SB 6.16.40)2 
जितमित्यत्र भवतेति ज्ञेयम् । आहेत्यत्र तु भवानिति ॥ चित्रकेतुः श्रीसङ्कर्षणम् ॥ 
In this verse, the past participle jitam, "eminence was attained," is to be understood as connected to the instrumental case pronoun bhavată, "by You" [which becomes the subject in the passive voice, i.e., "You became established in eminence"]. The pronoun bhavan, "You," [which is omitted in the verse,] should be adduced as the subject of the verb "spoke” (āha). 
1 
2 
This is Śrīdhara Svami's gloss, which employs the same compound "parama-utkarsa" as used by Śri Jiva to point out that Bhagavan's supreme eminence is due to His imparting instructions on bhakti. 
jitam ajita tada bhavata yadaha bhāgavatam dharmam anavadyam 
712 
120 Bhagavan's Supremacy Is Due to Imparting Bhakti 
Commentary 
THERE are two schools of Srimad Bhagavata. One, originating from Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, descends in a line of succession through Brahma, Narada, Vyasa, and Sukadeva. The other descends from Bhagavan Sankarṣaṇa to the Kumāras and on to King Prthu and others. Citraketu is a devotee of Sankarṣaṇa, and it is to Him that he addresses the present verse, thus making reference to the second of these two schools. He says that Bhagavan's supreme eminence (parama-utkarsa) is that He has conquered (jita) the hearts of His unconditional devotees by propagating 
bhakti. 

In his commentary on SB 6.16.40, Śrīdhara Svāmī interprets the word jitam, lit., "conquered or victorious," in two different ways one exceptional and one common? First, by extension of meaning, he takes it in the sense of "established in supreme eminence" (paramotkarṣeņa sthitam), on account of having spoken bhāgavatadharma. This accords with Jīva Gosvāmi's opening statement to this anuccheda. Then, taking jitam in its common sense, he connects it with the second line of the verse, which illuminates the meaning of Bhagavan's being victorious. He is victorious because of having conquered His unconditional devotees, such as Sanat Kumāra and other sages (nişkiñcanaḥ sanat kumārādayaḥ munayaḥ jitam). Śrī Jiva's specific use of the compound parama-utkarsa in his opening statement is a clear reference to Sridhara Svami's exceptional gloss on the word jitam in SB 6.16.40. 
3 
The past participle jitam is formed by applying the suffix kta on the root √ji. The root v√ji has two primary meanings - to be victorious and to excel. 
713 
