+++
title = "032"
+++
Bhakti Is the Supreme Fruit of Worshiping 
Other Devatās 
३२ । किं च (भा० २ | ३ |११ ) - 
MOREOVER, Śrī Suka said: 
एतावानेव यजतामिह निःश्रेयसोदयः । 
भगवत्यचलो भावो यद् भागवतसङ्गतः ॥ ५१ ॥ 
The ultimate benefit attainable for those engaged in the worship of various gods lies in this alone - that in the course of such worship (iha), by the association of devotees, unswerving devotion for Bhagavan is evoked. (SB 2.3.11)1 
टीका च - “पूर्वोक्तनानादेवतायजनस्यापि संयोगपृथक्त्वेन भक्तियोगफलत्वमाह 'एतावान्' इति । इन्द्रादीनपि यजतामिह तत्तद्यजने भागवतानां सङ्गतौ भगवत्यचलो भावो भक्तिर्भवतीति यदेतावानेव निःश्रेयसस्य परमपुरुषार्थस्य उदयो लाभः । अन्यत् तु सर्वं तुच्छमित्यर्थः” इत्येषा । 
1 
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments as follows: "In this verse, bhakti-yoga is declared to be the fruit even of the worship of the different devatās, referred to earlier. This is understood by the principle of samyoga-prthaktva, 'conjunction and particularity. 2 Even for those who worship gods like Indra, unswerving bhakti for 
1 etävän eva yajatām iha niḥsreyasodayah 
bhagavaty acalo bhavo yad bhagavata-sangatah 
2 The principle of interpretation being referred to here is expounded in 
Pūrva-mimāmsā. When a religious action is directed toward a particular and 
210 
32 Bhakti Is the Supreme Fruit of Worshiping Other Devatas 
Bhagavan arises due to contact with devotees obtained in the course of their respective worship (iha). This alone is the attainment of the ultimate good (niḥśreyasa), meaning the supreme goal of human life (parama-puruşartha). Any other gain, however, is insignificant. This is the meaning of the verse." [Here ends Śrīdhara Svami's comment.] 
अत्र “इन्द्रमिन्द्रियकामस्तु " ( भा० २।३।२ ) इत्याद्युक्तमिन्द्रियपाटवादिकं पृथक्त्वेन फलम् । भागवतेन संयोगे तु भावः फलम् । खादिरयूपसंयोगे यागस्य फलवैशिष्ट्यवदिति ज्ञेयम् ॥ श्रीशुकः ॥ 
[Śri Jiva now comments on the term samyoga-pṛthaktva, “conjunction and particularity."] The results of worshiping the devatās, such as acquiring expertise in sensory ability by the worship of Indra, were discussed in the eight verses referred to earlier (SB 2.3.2-9). All of these results (phala) are related to their particular and limited applications (prthakvena). But in conjunction with the association of devotees (bhagavatena samyoga), the fruit obtained is bhāva [i.e., bhakti], in the same way that a special result arises from a ritual act in which the sacrificial pillar is made from khadira wood. 
Commentary 
AFTER describing the worship of various deities directed toward the attainment of specific boons (SB 2.3.2-9), Śrī Śuka recommended (in SB 2.3.10) exclusive worship of the Complete Person, Bhagavan, irrespective of whether one's aspiration is for worldly benefits, liberation (mukti), or devotion (bhakti). Now, in the 
isolated result (pṛthaktva), yet there is samyoga, or conjunction, with some special component, the result produced is exceptional. In this case, the isolated result is that which accrues from the worship of specific devatas. When, however, such worship is conducted in conjunction with the association of devotees, it yields the extraordinary fruit of bhakti. This is the meaning of samyoga-prthaktva in this context. 
211I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
present verse (SB 2.3.11), Śrī Śuka declares that the ultimate benefit attainable by those who worship other deities is nothing other than bhakti to Bhagavan. 
How can this be possible? If someone worships a deva, such as Indra or Gaṇeśa, how can he or she attain bhakti? The worshiper should rightfully attain only that which is specified by Suka as the particular outcome that accrues from such worship. To answer this question, Śrī Suka affirms that this is made possible "by the association of a devotee," bhāgavata-sangataḥ. If by divine dispensation such a worshiper comes in contact with a devotee of Bhagavan, then by the latter's grace, the worshiper's faith can be redirected toward Bhagavan. An example of this is seen in the life of the maiden gopis who worshiped goddess Katyayani Devi and in so doing attained Śrī Kṛṣṇa. According to Śrī Suka's statements, the goddess Devī, or Maya, is to be worshiped by those who desire prosperity, devim māyām tu śri kamah (SB 2.3.3). But the same Devi, if worshiped with the intent to attain Krsna, will not bestow wealth but devotion to Krsna. 
Śrīdhara Svāmī comments that this enhancement of the result obtained from the same action is possible by the principle of samyoga-pṛthakatva-nyaya, "the rule of conjunction and particularity." This principle is described by Sabara Muni in his commentary on Jaimini-sutra 4.3.5. The principle is contextualized as follows: The Agnihotra ritual is a regular and compulsory duty, or nitya-karma, for the twice-born brahmanas. In the description of the procedure for executing this yajña, it is stipulated, "Perform the Agnihotra ritual with yogurt," dadhna juhoti. Then, in the same context, there is another injunction that a priest should perform the Agnihotra yajña for the host of the ritual (yajamāna), to fulfill the latter's desire to obtain powerful senses, dadhnendriyakamasya juhuyāt. When the yajña is performed with such a limited intent, it is incidental, or naimittika. In this regard, the doubt arises whether the Agnihotra performed with yogurt is a nitya-karma or naimittika-karma. It cannot be both, because that would entail the defect of vakya-bheda, an object or injunction having two different meanings simultaneously. The respective results of nityaand 
212 
32 Bhakti Is the Supreme Fruit of Worshiping Other Devatās 
naimittika-karmas are different. One person cannot obtain both results from the same action. 
Jaimini dispels this doubt by the sutra: "On the other hand, in the case where one substance [dravya] is related to both [nityaand naimittika-karma], the conjunction (samyoga) [with either one of the two] accords with its particularized application" (ekasya tu ubhayatve samyoga-pṛthaktvam, Jaimini-sūtra 4.3.5). This means that the relation (samyoga) of yogurt is different in the two different injunctions. In the injunction dadhna juhoti, the relation of yogurt is with the nitya-karma, while in dadhnendriya-kāmasya juhuyāt, its relation is with the incidental desire for powerful senses. On this basis, it is possible for the Agnihotra ritual performed with yogurt to yield two distinct results. 
In the same way, worship of the devas undertaken with the intention to secure a particular material boon will bestow only that result. If, however, by the association of a devotee one worships the same deity, considering that entity to be a manifestation of Bhagavan or a devotee of Bhagavan, without desiring anything material, then one will attain bhakti. 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī gives another example of the same principle from Purva-mimāmsă of a pillar made of the khadira tree (Acacia catechu), to which a sacrificial animal was tied in the context of a yajña. The khadira pillar is recommended for both nitya-karma as well as kamya-karma, which is anitya, or incidental. The question may be raised as to how a khadira pillar can be a component of both nitya-and kamya-karmas, as these two award different results. This question is resolved by the samyoga-pṛthaktva principle of conjunction and particularity. There are two separate statements about the usage of the khadira pillar, which lead to two separate results. 
In the next eight anucchedas, Śri Jiva Gosvāmī cites the statements of sage Saunaka, the principal student of Suta Gosvāmī, to establish bhakti as the abhidheya. 
213 
4 Śaunaka Establishes Bhakti through Negative 
Inference - Vyatireka 
Anucchedas 33-40 
