+++
title = "035"
+++
Human Life Devoid of Bhakti Is Animal Life 
३५ | तदेवाह (भा० २।३।१९ ) - 

ŚAUNAKA now speaks of that human animal: 
श्वविड्वराहोष्ट्रखरैः संस्तुतः पुरुषः पशुः । 
न यत्कर्णपथोपेतो जातु नाम गदाग्रजः || ५४ ।। 
Being glorified by people who are like dogs, hogs, camels, and asses, a person in whose ears the name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the elder brother of Gada, has not penetrated, is verily an animal. (SB 2.3.19)1 
श्वादितुल्यैस्तत्परिकरैः सम्यक्स्तुतोऽप्यसौ पुरुषः पशुः । तेषामेव मध्ये श्रेष्ठश्चेत् तर्हि महापशुरेवेत्यर्थः ॥ 
Although glorified eloquently by his associates, who are like dogs, hogs, camels, and asses, such a person is an animal. In other words, if he is the best among such persons only, then he is merely confirmed to be the biggest animal. 
Commentary 
IN THE previous verse (SB 2.3.18), Śaunaka referred to those persons, who do not spend even a moment in talks of Bhagavan, as 
1 
sva-vid-varahostra-kharaih samstutaḥ purusah pasuh 
na yat-karna-pathopeto jātu nāma gadāgrajaḥ 
221I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
animals. Now he indicates that there are gradations among such human animals. Some of them have followers or admirers who praise them. Such people are even bigger animals, being chief among the human animals. This is so because their power and status provoke them to become prouder and more egoistic than the others, and this makes it more difficult for them to surrender to God. They may even be disrespectful to God and His devotees. The mentality of such people is described in the 16th chapter of Bhagavad Gitā. 
The four animals mentioned in this verse are symbolic of characteristic patterns of instinctual behavior found even in humans: like dogs, human beings bark even at innocent people; like stooleating hogs, they eat junk food that is injurious to their health; like thorn-eating camels, they carry a heavy burden for little or no profit while habituated to the consumption of "thorny" experiences; and like asses, men are kicked by their wives for a little sex pleasure. The chief of human beings, who is praised by followers or admirers who are conditioned by such patterns, has all these four traits in him. This is the implied sense. 
Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti comments that human animals are more despicable than beastly animals. The reason is that human animals have the characteristics of all the four beasts named, i.e., the dog, hog, camel, and ass, while these animals have only the nature of their respective species. A human being can possess the traits of all four types of animals, but those creatures themselves cannot possess the instinctual nature that pertains to another species. The human beast willfully transgresses scriptural injunctions and behaves like an animal, but these animals merely follow their own nature. The human animal is aware that by pursuing animalistic behavior, degradation will ensue, and yet he does not give it up. Animals, however, being devoid of self-determined will and rationality, simply follow their inborn nature. 
Moreover, though a dog is greedy for food, he is faithful to his master, which is not the case for the human animal. The hog eats refuse and thus does not encroach on others' share. In the process, it even cleans up the environment. But the human animal 
222 
35 Human Life Devoid of Bhakti Is Animal Life 
snatches the share that belongs to others and lays waste to the environment. Although a camel eats thorny bushes, it also serves its master. The human animal eats delectable food but renders no service to his true master, God. Although an ass and a human animal are equal in the sense that they both get kicked by their respective female partners, they differ in that the ass does not retaliate against the female, and it never refuses to serve its master. Considering all these factors, the human animalas an animal - is inferior to other beasts, and in this sense to equate him to them is an affront to the animal species. 
In the next five verses, Saunaka Rsi describes the worthlessness of the bodily limbs if not employed in devotion. 
223 
