+++
title = "041"
+++
Brahmā Praises Narada's Question As It Relates to Bhagavān 
४१ | श्रीब्रह्मनारदसंवादेऽपि ( भा०२/५/९ ) - 
IN THE dialogue between Śri Brahma and Narada as well [bhakti is established as the abhidheya]. Brahma first commends Narada's question: 
सम्यक् कारुणिकस्येदं वत्स ते विचिकित्सितम् । यदहं चोदितः सौम्य भगवद्वीर्यदर्शने ॥ ६३ ॥ 
My son, this doubt of yours, which you have raised as an act of kindness upon me, is completely appropriate, because, my dear one, it has inspired me to illuminate the valiant deeds of Bhagavan. (SB 2.5.9)1 
Commentary 
AFTER King Parikṣit heard the reply to his queries given by Sukadeva in the first three chapters of the Second Canto, he posed further questions regarding the creation, sustenance, and dissolution of the cosmos (SB 2.4.5-10). Hearing the king's questions, the sage Śuka launched into a lengthy invocatory prayer to Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa (SB 2.4.12-24). He then concluded by pointing out that these very 
1 
samyak karunikasyedam vatsa te vicikitsitam 
yad aham coditaḥ saumya bhagavad-virya-darśane 
239 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
questions were posed by Narada to his father Brahma (SB 2.4.25). All this forms the subject matter of the fourth chapter. 
The opening eight verses of the fifth chapter are spoken by Nārada to Brahmā. He first praises his father as the sole creator and master of the universe, but then admits his surprise that Brahma too was engaged in severe penances. This elicited a doubt in Narada's mind that there could be an entity superior even to Brahma, and he was intent on discovering the truth behind it. Brahma begins his reply from SB 2.5.9, cited in this anuccheda. 
Brahma, being a great devotee of Krsna, did not feel flattered by the praise of Narada, who glorified him as the Supreme. He was happy that Narada had raised this query, because the answer would put his own position and the glory of Bhagavan in the proper perspective. A true devotee is always delighted to speak about Bhagavān. Questions related to Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa purify the speaker, the inquirer, and the audience, as affirmed by Śrī Suka himself in 
SB 10.1.16. 
In the next anuccheda, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī cites two verses spoken by Brahma from the fifth chapter of the Second Canto that establish Nārāyaṇa Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the ultimate end of all the Vedas and of all practices recommended therein. The point is that if Krsna is determined as the synthesis (samanvaya) of all the Vedas, then bhakti, being the sole means to attain Him, is thereby authenticated as the abhidheya of the Vedas. 
240 
