+++
title = "071"
+++
Krsna Recommends Pure Bhakti Alone - I 
७१ । तदेवं ज्ञानमिश्रां भक्तिमुपदिश्य तदनादरेणानुषङ्गसिद्धज्ञानगुणां शुद्धामेव भक्तिमुपदिशति चतुर्भिः (भा० ११ । ११ । २२ ) - 
IN THIS manner, Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa instructed Uddhava in bhakti mixed with jñāna. Yet, because He did not have the highest regard for such mixed devotion, He spoke four more verses elucidating pure bhakti, one of whose attributes is that it gives rise to perfect jñāna as a concomitant effect. He begins with this 
statement: 
यद्यनीशो धारयितुं मनो ब्रह्मणि निश्चलम् । 
मयि सर्वाणि कर्माणि निरपेक्षः समाचर ॥ १२२ ॥ 
If, however, you are unable to fix your mind unswervingly on Brahman, then offer all your prescribed actions unto Me without any motive. (SB 11.11.22)1 
“यदीति निश्चये” टीकायाम् “धत्ते पदं त्वमविता यदि विघ्नमूर्ध्नि” ( भा० ११ । ४ । १०) इतिवत् । अत्र खलु ज्ञानेच्छुरेव प्रकृतः । श्रीमदुद्धवं प्रति च तादृशत्वमारोप्यैवेदमुच्यते । ततश्च " श्रेयः सृतिं भक्तिमुदस्य ते विभो क्लिश्यन्ति ये केवलबोधलब्धये तेषामसौ” (भा० १०।१४।४) इत्यादिप्रमाणेन भक्तिं विना केवलज्ञानमार्गेण ब्रह्मणि मनो धारयितुं निश्चितमेवानीशो भवसि । ततोऽपि स्वतो ज्ञानादिसर्वगुणसेवितं भक्तिमार्गमेवाश्रयेति तत्सोपानमुपदिशति – मयीत्यादिना । 
yady aniso dharayitum mano brahmani niścalam mayi sarvāni karmani nirapekṣaḥ samacara 
386 
71 Krsna Recommends Pure Bhakti Alone - I 
The word yadi, "if," in the conditional clause, "If you are unable to fix your mind unswervingly on Brahman" (yadi brahmani niścalam manaḥ dharayitum aniśaḥ), indicates certainty [i.e., "Certainly you will not be able to fix your mind unswervingly on Brahman"]. This instance of a conditional construction used to express certainty is identical to that pointed out by Śrīdhara Svami in his gloss on the words yadi tvam avitā, "If, however, you are the protector of Your devotees" (SB 11.4.10) [see Anuccheda 64]. This assertion [of the certainty of being unable to fix the mind unswervingly on Brahman] is directed specifically toward those who aspire to pursue the jñāna-mārga. These words were thus spoken to Śrīmad Uddhava only by positing him as representative of those who aspire to jñāna. 
[The impossibility of fixing the mind unswervingly on Brahman is indicated in the following verse:] 
O almighty Lord, those who discard bhakti unto You, which is the means to supreme blessedness, and strive instead to attain realization of the radically unqualified Absolute, are left in the end with nothing more than their own labor, like those engaged in threshing coarse husks devoid of grain. (SB 10.14.4)2 
Therefore, on the authority of verses like the one just cited, it is certain that one will not be able to fix the mind on Brahman merely by the path of kevala-jñāna devoid of bhakti. As a result, one should resort to the path of bhakti alone, which is attended by jñāna and all other such capacities that are intrinsic to its essential nature. Kṛṣṇa then delineates the steps involved in the recourse to bhakti by saying that one should offer all of one's actions to Him without any motive. 
अथवा प्राक्तनभक्तिबलाभावाद् ब्रह्मज्ञानेच्छुर्यदि तत्र मनो धारयितुमनीशः स्यात् तदाधुनाप्येवं कुर्विति योज्यम् । समाचर अर्पय। निरपेक्षो वाञ्छान्तररहितः ॥ 
2 
Sreyah-sṛtim bhaktim udasya te vibho klisyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye teṣām asau klesala eva sisyate nanyad yatha sthula-tuṣāvaghātinām 
387 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
An alternate meaning to the verse is as follows:3 If a person aspiring to brahma-jñāna is unable to fix his mind on Brahman, owing to the absence of any involvement with bhakti in a previous life and the consequent absence in him of bhakti's intrinsic power, he should now offer his actions to Bhagavan in the manner described. This is how the verse is to be meaningfully connected. The verb samacara is in the imperative voice, meaning, "you should offer" (arpaya), and nirapekṣaḥ, as an attribute of the performer, means, "devoid of any other desire." 
Commentary 
IN THIS ANUCCHEDA, Śrī Jīva explains that it is not possible to fix the mind on Brahman without bhakti. He brings out this meaning by glossing the word yadi, "if," as "certainly," which he does on the authority of Śrīdhara Svami's commentary on SB 11.4.10, discussed in Anuccheda 64. He further supports this conclusion, drawn from the principal verse of this anuccheda (SB 11.11.22), with Brahma's famous statement that without bhakti a jñāna-yogi meets only with failure (SB 10.14.4). A similar statement is made by Śrīmati Devaki: 
3 
4 
O Lotus-eyed Lord, those who consider themselves as liberated, having elevated themselves to an exalted status through great hardship but who then disregard Your lotus feet, fall down from that position. (SB 10.2.32)* 
Previously the verse was interpreted taking the conditional clause beginning with "if" (yadi) in the stylistic sense of "certainty." This denied any possibility of fixing the mind unswervingly on Brahman by kevala-jñāna alone. In this alternate interpretation, the conditional yadi is taken in its normal sense of "if." The conditional clause would then have to accommodate the possibility of fixing the mind unswervingly on Brahman. The necessary condition for being able to do so, however, is that the practitioner must have performed bhakti in a previous life and thus been endowed with bhakti's own power. The point that Śrī Jiva is making in this alternate explanation is that the conditional clause can be upheld in the true sense of "factual possibility" only if accounted for in this manner. Short of this necessary criterion, the conditional amounts to certainty. ye'nye ravindakṣa vimukta-maninas tvayy asta-bhāvād avisuddha buddhayaḥ āruhya kṛcchreṇa param padam tatah patanty adho'nadṛta yuşmad anghrayaḥ 
388 
71 Krsna Recommends Pure Bhakti Alone - I 
Krsna also informs Arjuna: 
The misery of those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest is greater, because the goal of the unmanifest is attained with difficulty by embodied beings. (GĪTĀ 12.5)5 
Śrī Jiva also provides an alternative interpretation to the verse by taking the standard meaning of yadi as "if." In this case, the sense is that if a person is so inclined, it may be possible for him to fix the mind on Brahman only if he has already contacted bhakti in a past life and been endowed with bhakti's power. But one who does not have the residual power of such bhakti from a past life would certainly not be able to focus his mind on Brahman. Such a person is advised to take to bhakti in the form of offering his actions to Kṛṣṇa without any material motive. This will purify the heart. Then by continuous engagement in bhakti, immediate insight (jñāna) will arise of its own accord, and by that one will be able to fix the mind on Brahman without deviation. 
This progression is, of course, relevant only to one who is attracted to Brahman realization due to associating with those on the path of jñāna. It is through the power of bhakti alone that the self's conscious identity with Brahman is immediately selfdisclosed. Being established in this state, the practitioner then experiences transcendental joy and eventually attains pure bhakti. By the power of this bhakti, he can enter the state of samādhi through meditation on Bhagavan. Then, on the strength of the perfect jñāna disclosed through bhakti, he attains sayujya. Thus, it is only by way of the potency that is intrinsic to bhakti that jñānayoga can bring forth its intended fruit, and not independently. This is the progression elaborated by Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself to Arjuna in Bhagavad Gită: 
5 
O son of Kunti, learn from Me in brief how a person who has attained the perfection [of freedom from consequential action] realizes Brahman, which is the highest culmination of knowledge 
kleso'dhikataras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām 
avyakta hi gatir duḥkham dehavadbhir avapyate 
389 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
(jñāna). Endowed with pure intellect; controlling the mind with fortitude; forsaking sense objects such as pleasing sound; giving up attachment and hatred completely; living in a solitary place and eating little; controlling the body, speech, and mind; being ever devoted to the yoga of meditation [on Bhagavan]; fully taking refuge in dispassion; giving up egotism, the force of material desires, arrogance, desires for sense pleasures, anger, and possessions; and being free from the notion of ownership and serene at heart, one becomes eligible to realize Brahman. Having realized Brahman and being peaceful, one neither grieves nor hankers for anything. Being equal to all beings, one attains supreme devotion to Me. Through that supreme devotion, one fully realizes Me in truth, what the extent of My glories are, and who I am in My essential nature. Thereafter, on knowing Me in reality through such devotion, one enters into Me [achieves sayujya liberation]. (GĪTĀ 18.50-55)6 
In the next anuccheda, Kṛṣṇa continues to instruct Uddhava in pure bhakti, dismissing the relevance of jñāna. 
390 
siddhim prapto yatha brahma tathāpnoti nibodha me samāsenaiva kaunteya nisthā jñānasya yā parā buddhyā visuddhaya yukto dhṛtyātmānam niyamya ca sabdadin viṣayāms tyaktvä räga-dveṣau vyudasya ca vivikta-sevi laghv-asi yata-vāk-kaya-manasaḥ dhyana-yoga-paro nityam vairagyaṁ samupäśritaḥ ahankaram balam darpam kamam krodham parigraham vimucya nirmamaḥ santo brahma-bhūyaya kalpate brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na socati na kārkṣati samaḥ sarveşu bhuteṣu mad-bhaktim labhate param bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yas cāsmi tattvataḥ tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā višate tad-anantaram 
