+++
title = "072"
+++
Kṛṣṇa Recommends Pure Bhakti Alone - II 
७२ । ततश्च (भा० ११।११।२३-२४ ) - 
THEREAFTER, Śrī Krsna said: 
श्रद्धालुर्मत्कथाः शृण्वन् सुभद्रा लोकपावनीः । गायन्ननुस्मरन् कर्म जन्म चाभिनयन् मुहुः ॥ १२३ ॥ मदर्थे धर्मकामार्थानाचरन् मदपाश्रयः । 
लभते निश्चलां भक्तिं मय्युद्भव सनातने ॥ १२४ ॥ 
O Uddhava, a person endowed with faith who hears, sings, and continuously remembers narrations about Me, which are highly auspicious and which purify the world, who regularly enacts dramas depicting My advent and exploits, and who, having taken shelter of Me, carries out his responsibilities in the fields of dharma, artha, and kāma for My sake, attains unswerving devotion unto Me, the Eternal (SB 11.11.23-24 ) 1 
टीकाच – “मदर्पणेन कर्मभिर्विशुद्धसत्त्वस्यान्तरङ्गां भक्तिमाह - श्रद्धालुरिति" इत्येषा । अभिनयन् जन्मकर्मलीलयोर्मध्ये येऽंशा निजाभीष्टभावभक्तगतास्तान् स्वयमनुकुर्वन् भगवद्गतान् भक्तान्तरगतांश्च तानन्यद्वारानुकुर्वन्नित्यर्थः । 
Śrīdhara Svāmī comments as follows: "In these two verses, Bhagavan describes antaranga-bhakti, devotion that is a function of Bhagavan's intrinsic potency, which is obtained by one 
1 
śraddhalur mat-kathah syvan subhadra loka-pavanih 
gāyann anusmaran karma janma cābhinayan muhuh 
mad-arthe dharma-kāmārthan acaran mad-apasrayaḥ labhate niscalam bhaktim mayy uddhava sanatane 
391I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
who is established in pure being (visuddha-sattva) by virtue of offering his actions to Bhagavan." [Here ends Śrīdhara Svāmi's comment.] 
The word abhinayan, "acting," means that in regard to the lilās of Bhagavan's advent and divine acts, one should personally enact those roles that depict the character of a loving associate of Bhagavan who is endowed with the devotional temperament (bhava) for which one aspires. Roles portraying Bhagavan and devotees imbued with other devotional moods should be enacted by others. 
किं च यो धर्मो गोदानादिलक्षणस्तमपि मदर्थे मदीयजन्मादिमहोत्सवाङ्गत्वेनैव । यश्च कामो महाप्रासादवासादिलक्षणस्तमपि मदर्थे मदीयसेवाद्यर्थं मन्मन्दिरवासादिलक्षणत्वेनैव । यश्चार्थो धनसङ्ग्रहस्तमपि मदर्थे मत्सेवामात्रोपयोगित्वेनैवाचरन् सेवमानः । 
| 
Moreover, dharma, or "socio-religious duty," referring to virtuous acts such as offering a cow in charity, should also be undertaken for the sake of Bhagavan. This means that even these virtuous acts should be executed only as subsidiary components of a festival related to Bhagavan's birth or other lilās. Additionally, even kama, or "the experiential appropriation of sense objects," referring to pleasures such as residing in a palatial mansion, should also be engaged in only for the sake of Bhagavān. Accordingly, the latter pleasure can be fulfilled specifically by residing in a temple of Bhagavan for the sole purpose of serving Him. As regards artha, or "prosperity," referring to the acquisition of wealth, that too should be taken up only for the sake of Bhagavan. This means that one should procure wealth only to an extent that is expedient for Bhagavan's service. The word acaran, "performing," means that one should carry out these responsibilities in the fields of dharma, artha, and kāma as a matter of sacred service (sevamanaḥ). 
मदपाश्रय आश्रयान्तरशून्यचेताश्च सन् तामेव कथाश्रवणादिलक्षणां भक्तिं मयि निश्चलां सर्वदाव्यभिचारिणीं लभते तत्सुखेन कैवल्यादावप्यनादरात् । न च भजनीयस्य चलतया वा सा चलिष्यतीति मन्तव्यमित्याह - सनातन इति ॥ 
392 
72 Kṛṣṇa Recommends Pure Bhakti Alone - II 
Mad-apāśrayaḥ, "having taken shelter of Me," means, "being devoid of any other shelter in the core of one's being (cetāḥ)." Kṛṣṇa concludes, "The person who has thus taken shelter of Me attains unswerving devotion (niscalām bhaktim) unto Me." In this regard, the bhakti attained is the very same as that which was previously practiced (tām eva bhaktim labhate), consisting of hearing, singing, and remembering Bhagavan's narrations. That it is now unswerving (niścalam) means that it is in a state of perpetually unbroken continuity (sarvadă avyabhicāriṇīm). [How it is that the end result (puruṣārtha) attained through the practice of bhakti is unswerving bhakti itself, and not the liberation of "absolute aloneness" (kaivalya)] is due to the fact that even liberation (kaivalya) is disregarded owing to the bliss that is intrinsic to such devotion. One should not entertain the doubt that the object of worship (bhajaniya) might be temporary, in which case the bhakti attained would also necessarily be temporary. In order to dispel any possible doubt in this regard, the word sanātana, "eternal," is used to specify the transtemporal nature of Bhagavan. 
Commentary 
IN ANUCCHEDA 67, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī made the point that bhakti is easily executed, sukha-sadhyatvam. In the two verses cited here (SB 11.11.23-24), Krsna makes evident how this is so. Simply by hearing, singing, recollecting, and enacting Krsna's stories, one can perform bhakti. Hearing, speaking, and so on, are acts that we routinely carry out in our day-to-day lives. If the same actions are undertaken in relation to Krsna, they lead to perfection. There cannot be any spiritual practice easier than this. On the path of unqualified jñāna, singing, dancing, play acting, or watching plays or movies, are all forbidden. 
393 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
The foundation of jñana is detachment, vairagya. A sannyāsī is advised to remain alone to avoid the disputations of the many (SB 11.9.10); he is considered socially dead. But on the bhakti path, one can even perform plays based on Kṛṣṇa's līlās. In India, dramas depicting Rāma-lila and Kṛṣṇa-līlā have been widely popular for millennia. Even in small villages, such plays are regularly enacted, particularly on special occasions, such as the Dasahara and Dīpāvali festivals. In Vrindavan, there are many aśramas where there is regular kirtana, recitation of Srimad Bhagavata, or performance of kṛṣṇa-lila. Caitanya-lila as well is popular in Bengal, and some rāsalilā troupes in Vrindavan have also made it a feature of attraction for Hindi-speaking audiences. 
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi comments that one can also participate in such plays, taking a role that accords with one's aspired for devotional temperament (bhava)? But he advises against taking the role of Bhagavan or of an associate of Bhagavan whose temperament is different from one's own. This instruction would seem to apply in particular to those who "regularly" (muhuḥ) enact plays, as mentioned in the verse, and for whom such enactment becomes a form of sadhana. 
Since the ongoing discussion is in regard to the abhidheya, it logically follows that the reference to performing plays should also be within the context of the elaboration of sädhana. In this case especially, the regular appropriation of an emotional complex that is contrary to one's own would evidently impede the self-disclosure of the aspired for perfected feeling state (bhava). In the secular field, a professional actor is often required to play roles that do not accord with his or her temperament. For a bhakta, however, such contrary roles are not conducive to the unfolding of his or her devotional temperament. Unlike professional actors who perform for a living, a bhakta acts as part of his sadhana. Thus, it is important that the role he plays does not impede his devotional bhāva. 
2 
Besides the direct devotional acts of hearing, and so on, Śri Jiva Gosvāmī comments that even responsibilities related to dharma, 
The topic of the varieties of transcendental devotional temperaments, bhāvas, will be discussed in Priti Sandarbha. 
394 
72 Kṛṣṇa Recommends Pure Bhakti Alone - II 
artha, and kāma need not be abandoned. They should also be performed in relation to Kṛṣṇa. This means that one can function within the varṇāśrama system and still execute bhakti. In the case of jñāna-yoga, one has to abandon all karma, family, and possessions. In bhakti, however, one simply needs to transform the nature of the acts related to dharma, artha, and kama. On this basis, bhakti is understood as universal dharma. 
In this connection, kama was earlier defined by Śrīdhara Svāmī (in Anuccheda 6) as "the experiential appropriation of sense objects" (vişaya-bhoga). So, for example, the enjoyment of residing in a palatial building can be fulfilled by living in a grand temple for the sole purpose of serving Bhagavan. The point to be noted here is that the appropriation of sense objects is inevitable in embodied life. What can be transformed is the manner in which objects are appropriated and the intent that informs such involvement. For instance, the predilection to eat delicious food can be fulfilled by first offering it to Bhagavan and then eating the sanctified remnants, called prasāda. Taking such prasada is also an important act of devotion to Bhagavan. Indeed, Uddhava describes himself as "one who lives on Krsna's remnants," ucchista-bhoji (SB 11.6.46). 
In regard to prosperity (artha), as long as a person is drawn to wealth, he can engage in business with the attitude that he is earning money for the service of Bhagavan. The guiding principle in all such endeavors is that one should never consider oneself independent of Bhagavan. If one recognizes his constitutional belongingness to Bhagavan, he can engage all his talents in His service. There is no need to abandon society and seek out a life of utter seclusion. Rather, the state of having authentically offered oneself to Bhagavan is itself the state of withdrawal from all other involvement. This is the sense implied by the compound mad-apāśraya, "having taken shelter of Me." Within the context of varṇāśrama, mad-apāśraya also conveys the notion that one should not resort to the worship of other gods. Respect is extended to all the devas and to all beings, each in accordance with their respective merit, but worship is intended only for the Supreme Entity, Bhagavan. 
395 
396 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
In the next anuccheda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa makes the point that the predilection for bhakti is transmitted specifically through sat- 
sanga. 
Anucchedas 73-74 
Sat-sanga Is the Cause of the Predilection for Bhakti 
७३-७४ । नन्वेवम्भूतभक्तिमार्गे प्रवृत्तिर्निष्ठा वा कथं स्यात् ? इत्याशङ्क्य तत्र हेतु - माह “सत्सङ्गलब्धया भक्त्या मयि मां स उपासिता” (भा० ११ । ११ । २५) इति । भक्त्या भक्तिरुच्या स भक्तो मामुपासिता भजमानो भवति । 
ONE MAY question how the predilection for (pravṛtti) and resolute faith (nişṭhā) in the path of this manner of bhakti can come into being. Anticipating such a question, Śrī Kṛṣṇa disclosed the underlying cause in this regard:" "By way of bhakti unto Me, imbibed through the association of realized devotees, he [the devotional practitioner] mindfully worships Me" (SB 11.11.25A)? 
The word bhaktyä, "by way of devotion," means "by the predilection (ruci)3 acquired for devotion." The pronoun saḥ, "he," refers 
1 
2 
3 
Normally each anuccheda contains one principal verse of the Bhagavata as its subject. Here, however, one verse has been split into two and thus counted as two anucchedas. The first half of the verse (marked as SB 11.11.25A) points out the cause giving rise to the predilection for bhakti, and the second half (marked as SB 11.11.25B) describes the outcome of bhakti. 
sat-sanga-labdhaya bhaktyä mayi mam sa upăsită 
The word ruci, commonly rendered as "taste," is synonymous here with the word pravṛtti, "predilection," used by Śrī Jiva in his opening statement. The word "predilection" implies a strong liking or preference derived from one's temperament or experience. Hence, the words ruci and pravṛtti here signify one and the same thing. It is to be noted that the word ruci here does not refer to the stage of bhakti that follows after niṣṭhā in Rupa Gosvāmi's famous progression given in Bhakti-rasamṛta-sindhu (1.4.15-16). Rather, it refers to the initial → 
397 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
to the devotional practitioner (bhakta). That he mindfully worships Me (mām upāsitā) means that he becomes one endowed with resolute bhakti (bhajamānaḥ) [meaning one in whom niṣṭhā in bhakti has been born]. 
तस्य च भक्तस्य मदीयं ब्रह्माकारं भगवदाकारं च सर्वमपि स्वरूपविज्ञानमनायासेनैव भवतीत्याह " स वै मे दर्शितं सद्भिरञ्जसा विन्दते पदम् " ( भा० ११ | ११ | २५) इति । अञ्जसा भक्त्यनुषङ्गेनैव । पदं स्वरूपम् ॥ श्रीभगवान् ॥ 
"To such a devotee all realized knowledge of My essential nature, both as Brahman and as Bhagavan, is effortlessly revealed." This is the point that Śrī Kṛṣṇa makes in the second half of the verse: "Such a devotee straightforwardly attains to My existential status (padam), which is disclosed by those devotees who are established in and embody the truth (sadbhih)" (SB 11.11.25B).* 
The word anjasă, "straightforwardly," indicates that this attainment occurs simply as a concomitant effect of bhakti. The word padam, or "existential status," means "essential nature" (svarüpa). 
Commentary 
FROM THE ease of devotion pointed out in the preceding verses, it may be questioned that if bhakti is so simple, why doesn't everyone take to it? The reason for this is that people generally have no interest in it. A person actively pursues only that in which he or she has an interest (ruci). The cause or impetus for such interest may be pleasure, wealth, position, power, name, fame, or other factors. Most people do not have any knowledge of bhakti at all, or at best 
awakening of attraction for bhakti, as discussed in Anucchedas 10-11 of this volume. This is perfectly evident from Sri Jiva's statement in Anuccheda 11, which we cite here for the sake of clarity: "Considering this possibility, Suta Gosvāmi offers an easy method that leads to the appearance of taste. In five verses, he delineates the progression of bhakti, beginning from the taste (ruci) for such katha, up to naisthiki-bhakti, or fixity in devotion." Śri Jiva's discussion in the present anuccheda is in correspondence with this earlier explanation. sa vai me darsitam sadbhir anjasā vindate padam 
398 
73-74 Sat-sanga Is the Cause of the Predilection for Bhakti 
their understanding is very superficial. The true cause for their lack of interest in bhakti is that they have not been graced with the association of genuine devotees, sat-sanga, which is the only source from which the predilection for bhakti is born. 
Bhakti, being the intrinsic potency (svarupa-śakti) of Bhagavan, is not innate to the self (ātmā), which is constituted of a different category of being, namely, the intermediary potency (taṭasthāśakti), referring to the class of conscious entities that must mediate between the prevailing influences of spirit and matter. This implies that for bhakti to become established in the ātmā, it must be transmitted by one in whom svarupa-sakti is active. As such, bhakti can be received only from Bhagavan Himself or His devotees. This is a crucial foundational principle established in Srimad Bhagavata and must be understood clearly. In this regard, Śrī Prahlada says: 
As long as these people [of materialistic regard] do not bathe in the dust of the feet of exalted devotees, who have abandoned all sense of possessiveness, their minds cannot touch the feet of Bhagavan Urukrama [Śrī Kṛṣṇa] - the object of contacting which is the cessation of vitiated existence. (SB 7.5.32)5 
The expression, "bathing in the dust of the feet of exalted devotees," implies receiving their grace. Later in Anuccheda 179, Śrīla Jiva Gosvāmi will undertake an elaborate analysis of how bhakti makes its appearance within the ātmā. In the following anuccheda, Uddhava inquires as to the relative importance of the various paths that Kṛṣṇa had described to him. 
5 
naisām matis tavad urukramänghrim spršaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ mahiyasām pāda-rajo'bhisekam nişkincanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat 
399 
