+++
title = "109"
+++
Nondevotees Are Bereft of Divine Qualities 
१०९ | तथा (भा० ५ ।१८।१२) - 

PRAHLADA spoke in the same terms to Bhagavan Nrsimhadeva: 
यस्यास्ति भक्तिर्भगवत्यकिञ्चना सर्वैर्गुणैस्तत्र समासते सुराः । हरावभक्तस्य कुतो महद्गुणा मनोरथेनासति धावतो बहिः ॥ २७२ ॥ 
The celestial beings (suras) along with all their qualities become firmly established in one who has unmotivated devotion for Bhagavan. On the other hand, where are divine qualities to be found in a person bereft of devotion for Sri Hari? Such a person rushes about in outward pursuit of impermanent sense objects led by the chariot of desire. (SB 5.18.12)1 
अकिञ्चना निष्कामा । गुणैर्ज्ञानवैराग्यादिभिः सह सर्वे शिवब्रह्मादयो देवाः सम्यगासते ॥ प्रह्लादः श्रीनृसिंहम् ॥ 
The word akiñcană [qualifying bhakti] means, "without any motive" (niṣkāmā). All the devas headed by Śiva and Brahmā along with their corresponding qualities, such as knowledge (jñāna) and detachment (vairāgya), are firmly established (samāsate, i.e., samyag-asate) [in a person endowed with akiñcanā bhakti]. 
1 yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcana sarvair gunais tatra samāsate surāḥ harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ 
623 
Commentary 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
THE DEVAS reside in the body of a devotee. Thus, by honoring a devotee, one honors all the devas as well. The word suras (i.e., devas), used in the verse, could also refer to the various presiding deities of the senses, who facilitate the connection between the sense capacities and their objects. These entities also support the devotees by animating their senses optimally for the service of Bhagavan. The devotees in whom the devas and their qualities are said to reside are those in whom akiñcana bhakti for Bhagavan has become manifested. The word akiñcana, lit., "not having anything," as a qualifier of bhakti, refers to bhakti that is unmotivated (niskāmā) and free from egoism (nivṛtta-abhimānā)? The devotees who are endowed with such devotion, who act solely for the pleasure of Bhagavan and His devotees, are devoid of qualities that are born of the material gunas (prakrta-guna). Rather, their qualities are transcendental in nature (aprākṛta-guna), beyond all concept of virtue and vice. Krsna affirms this truth in the following words: 
Those who are established in authentic being (sādhūnām), who are thus equally disposed to all phenomenal uprisings (samacittānām), who have attained the transcendence [Iśvara] beyond the scope of intellection (buddheḥ param upeyuṣām), and who are exclusively devoted to Me, have no attributes (gunas) arising out of virtue and vice (guna-dosa). (SB 11.20.36)* 
Negative qualities arise out of selfishness. Those who are bereft of devotion are naturally attached to the material body and the things related to it. Out of this misidentification with the body, the duality of attachment and aversion (raga-dveṣa) comes about. These are two sides of the same coin, namely, selfishness or egoism. Consequently, even the nondevotees' virtuous acts, such as charity, are also tainted by the defilement of self-interest. Their 
2 
This is according to Sridhara Svami's gloss on the word akincana in SB 10.51.56. 
* Śrīdhara Svāmi glosses the word sadhūnām, lit., "the saintly," as "those who are 
devoid of all attachment" (nirasta-rāgādinām). 
4 
na mayy ekanta-bhaktānām guna-dosodbhava gunah sādhūnām sama-cittānāṁ buddheḥ param upeyuṣām 
624 
109 Nondevotees Are Bereft of Divine Qualities 
positive qualities are conditioned by and limited to the empirical ego or materiality. For this reason, Prahlada states that such materialistic people are bereft of divine qualities (mahad-guṇāḥ), meaning those that pertain to the nature of the magnanimous souls who are established in authentic being. He did not claim, however, that they have no virtues whatsoever. 
625 
