+++
title = "119"
+++
Vyasa Deliberates on the Cause of His Dissatisfaction 
११९ । अत एव स्वगतं विचारयति स्म ( भा० १ | ४ | ३१) - 
ŚRI VYASA, therefore, deliberated within himself as follows: 
किं वा भागवता धर्मा न प्रायेण निरूपिताः । प्रियाः परमहंसानां त एव ह्यच्युतप्रियाः ॥ ३२९ ॥ 
Is this because I have insufficiently described the dharmas that are dear to the most highly elevated devotees - those pertaining directly to Bhagavan - since only these dharmas are loved by Bhagavan Acyuta [Śrī Kṛṣṇa]? (SB 1.4.31)1 
स्पष्टम् ॥ श्रीव्यासः ॥ 
The meaning of this statement is clear. 
Commentary 
VYASA divided the single Veda into four so that its import could be easily understood and applied. He then wrote eighteen Purāņas as a supplement to the Vedas to enable people to easily grasp their essential message. He wrote Vedanta-sutra to synthesize the meaning of the Upanisads as a whole. He also wrote the epic, Mahābhārata, for those who were ineligible to study the Vedas. Even after 
1kim vā bhāgavata dharma na prayeṇa nirūpitāḥ 
priyāḥ paramahamsānām ta eva hy acyuta-priyaḥ 
710 
119 Vyasa Deliberates on the Cause of His Dissatisfaction 
accomplishing all this work for the benefit of humanity, he was still not satisfied, feeling that something was amiss. It was in this mood that he deliberated on the cause of his unhappiness, as described in the present verse. He intuited that it was because he had not explicitly established bhakti, which alone is dear to Bhagavan. The singular importance of bhakti was buried under a multitude of instructions regarding rituals and routine religious duties. Vyasa's doubt was later confirmed by his teacher, Narada, in the verses discussed above in Anucchedas 116 and 117. 
711
