+++
title = "21"

+++


21. If it be said that they are mere glorification, on account of their reference; not so, on account of the newness.

The following point is next enquired into. Are texts such as 'That Udgītha is the best of all essences, the highest, holding the supreme place, the eighth' (Cḥ. Up. I, 1, 3) meant to glorify the Udgītha as a constituent element of the sacrifice, or to enjoin a meditation on the Udgītha as the best of all essences, and so on? The Pūrvapakshin holds the former view, on the ground that the text declares the Udgītha to be the best of all essences in so far as being a constituent element of the sacrifice. The case is analogous to that of texts such as 'the ladle is this earth, the āhavanīya is the heavenly world,' which are merely meant to glorify the ladle and the rest as constituent members of the sacrifice.--This view the latter part of the Sūtra sets aside 'on account of newness.'

 Texts, as the one referring to the Udgītha, cannot be mere glorifications; for the fact of the Udgītha being the best of essences is not established by any other means of proof, and the text under discussion cannot therefore be understood as a mere anuvāda, meant for glorification. Nor is there, in proximity, any injunction of the Udgītha on account of connexion with which the clause declaring the Udgītha to be the best of all essences could naturally be taken as an anuvāda (glorifying the thing previously enjoined in the injunctive text); while there is such an injunction in connexion with the (anuvāda) text 'The ladle is this earth,' and so on. We thus cannot but arrive at the conclusion that the text is meant to enjoin a meditation on the Udgītha as being the best of all essences, and so on--the fruit of such meditation being an increase of vigour and efficacy on the part of the sacrifice.

