+++
title = "243"
+++
Sat-sanga Is Effective Even without Proper Awareness 
1 
२४३ । एष च सत्सङ्गो ज्ञानं विनापि कृतोऽर्थद एव स्यादित्याह (भा० ३।२३।५५ ) - 
THIS ASSOCIATION of authentic devotees (sat-sanga) is indeed effective in yielding its fruit, even if undertaken without proper awareness (jñāna), as indicated by Devahūti: 
सङ्गो यः संसृतेर्हेतुरसत्सु विहितोऽधिया । 
स एव साधुषु कृतो निःसङ्गत्वाय कल्पते ॥ ७३२ ॥ 
The very same association (sanga) that is the cause of mate- rial bondage (samsṛti) when undertaken out of ignorance (adhiya) in regard to those who are involved in inauthentic being (asatsu), leads to freedom from bondage when taken up [even without proper awareness]1 in regard to genuine saints (sadhus). (SB 3.23.55)2 
अधिया अज्ञानेन । यत् तु पूर्वं श्रीनारदादौ मुन्यन्तरसाधारणदृष्टिर्निन्दिता तदिहानिग्धे ज्ञानलवदुर्विदग्धे च ज्ञेयम् ॥ श्रीदेवहूतिः ॥ 
2 
The word adhiya, which Jiva Gosvami glosses as ajnanena, "out of ignorance," or "without proper awareness," can be syntactically connected even to the second line of the verse. This is justified in particular because of the use of the words sah eva sarigaḥ, "the very same association" [i.e., that which is undertaken without proper awareness]. Clearly, this is Śrī Jiva's intent here, otherwise there would be no point in citing this verse to support his opening statement. sango yaḥ samsṛter hetur asatsu vihito'dhiya 
sa eva sadhuşu kṛto nihsangatvaya kalpate 
213 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
The word adhiya means "out of ignorance" (ajñāna). Previously, however [in Anuccheda 179], considering great devotees such as Śrī Narada as ordinary saints was condemned. [So how can it be said that sat-sanga leads to freedom from bondage even when taken up without the proper awareness?] This restric- tion [i.e., the impropriety of view that counters the effectivity of sat-sanga] should be understood to apply here only in the case of those who are hard-hearted (asnigdha) or who are proud of their petty knowledge (jñana-lava-durvidagdha). [Otherwise, for those who are simple-hearted but ignorant, sat-sanga will definitely yield its fruit.] 
Commentary 
SAT-SANGA is efficacious even if taken up unwittingly, meaning, in ignorance of its importance or of the greatness of an advanced devo- tee's factual state of being. This association is comparable to taking a powerful medicine without having knowledge of its efficiency- the medicine will still act. The potency of an object bears fruit irre- spective of the user's knowledge about it (vastu-saktir buddhim nape- ksate). Fire will burn whoever touches it, whether a naive child or an educated adult who knows about fire's burning capacity. The story of Narada in his previous life, as the young son of a maid- servant, is an example of association undertaken without mature 
awareness. 
An objection may be raised in this regard. In Anuccheda 179, it was said that if one holds an inappropriate attitude toward a great devotee, it will impede the capacity of that association to engen- der the turning of regard toward Bhagavan (sammukhya). So how can it be said here that sat-sanga is effective even when undertaken without proper awareness? 
Śrī Jiva Gosvami replies that the statement made earlier was in regard to those who are cunning and proud of their petty knowl- edge. Their unfavorable demeanor curtails the power of transfor- mation that such association holds. For those who are innocent, 
214 
243 Sat-sanga Is Effective Even without Proper Awareness 
however, association of the wise will be effective, even if such peo- ple lack proper awareness of the power of that association. Be that as it may, sat-sanga is more effective when taken up in knowledge and with respect. 
215 
