+++
title = "271"
+++
Kaliyuga Is Glorious Because of Kirtanam 
२७१ । अत एव (भा० ११/५/३६ ) - 
THEREFORE, sage Karabhajana said to King Nimi: 
कलिं सभाजयन्त्यार्या गुणज्ञाः सारभागिनः । 
यत्र सङ्कीर्तनेनैव सर्वः स्वार्थोऽभिलभ्यते ।। ८३५ ।। 
Those who are cultured in spiritual wisdom (aryah), who can recognize the quality that inheres within any given thing (guna- jñaḥ), and who thus extract the essence of all things (sara- bhaginah), extol the essential value of Kaliyuga, in which all goals that one might aspire for can be attained simply by the performance of sankirtana. (SB 11.5.36)1 
गुणज्ञाः कीर्तनप्रचाररूपं तद्गुणं जानन्तः । अत एव तद्दोषाग्रहणात् सारभागिनः सारमात्र- ग्रहणाः कलिं सभाजयन्ति । 
In the context of this verse, the word guna-jñaḥ, "those who can recognize the quality that inheres within any given thing," means, "those who recognize Kaliyuga's quality in the form of the widespread proliferation of kirtana." Therefore, they are known as sära-bhäginaḥ, or "those who grasp only the essence of all things" (sära-matra-grahaṇah), because they are uncon- cerned with Kali's defects. It is for this reason that they extol Kaliyuga. 
1 kalim sabhajayanty arya guna-jnaḥ sara-bhaginah 
yatra sankirtanenaiva sarvah svartho'bhilabhyate 
360 
271 Kaliyuga Is Glorious Because of Kirtanam 
1 
गुणमेव दर्शयति-यत्र प्रचारितेन सङ्कीर्तनेनैव साधनान्तरनिरपेक्षेण तेनेत्यर्थः । सर्वो ध्यानादिभिः कृतादिषु साधनसहस्रैः साध्यः ॥ 
Sage Karabhajana describes the virtue of this age in the sec- ond line of the verse. The pronoun yatra, "in which," means "in Kaliyuga," and the words sankirtanena eva, "simply by the performance of sankirtana," mean "by sankirtana alone, with- out reliance on any other practice (sadhana)." The words sarvaḥ svärthaḥ, "all aspired for goals," mean "all the various ends to be attained (sädhyah) by thousands of methods prescribed for the other yugas, such as the practice of meditation in Satyayuga." [In Kaliyuga, all of these are attained simply by sankirtana.] 
Commentary 
THE result that one can attain by undertaking spiritual practice for thousands of years in other yugas can be attained in a short period of time in Kaliyuga by performing kirtana. Indeed, one can attain a much more valuable end in the form of pure love for Krsna, which was unknown even to great sages in former times. Therefore, those who are able to recognize the quality that inheres within objects praise Kaliyuga, in spite of the fact that it is rife with numerous vices and is considered the most degraded of all the yugas. Kirtana is like a powerful pious emperor who chases away all the rogue-like defects of Kali. This is stated by Sukadeva: 
O King, Kaliyuga is indeed a storehouse of all vice, yet it has one great virtue. Merely by performing kirtana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one is freed from all bondage and attains the supreme destination. (SB 12.3.51)2 
There is a popular story of unknown origin that I have heard regarding the glory of Kaliyuga. Once there was a meeting of great sages, who gathered to discuss the greatness of the different yugas. There was no consensus as to which yuga was the best, so they 
2 
kaler dosa-nidhe rajann asti hy eko mahan gunah 
kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangaḥ param vrajet 
361 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
decided to approach Vyasadeva and take his opinion. They all went to his residence at Badarika Asrama in the Himalayas. When they arrived there, Vyasa was taking a dip in the river Sarasvati. Each time he ducked his head, he would come up muttering, "Kali is great." When at last he came out of the water, the sages asked him the reason for his statement. In reply, Vyasa explained to them that Kali is the best yuga because in it one can attain the highest goal of life by kirtana alone. Knowing this attribute of Kali, King Parīkṣit did not kill Kali personified, although the latter offended a bull by breaking three of its legs. 
It may be noted that although kirtana is available in every yuga, it becomes popular only in the age of Kali. Sri Jiva explains the reason for this in the next anuccheda. 
362 
