+++
title = "289"
+++
Honorability Accords with the Degree of Awareness of Bhagavan 
२८९ । "तेष्वेव भगवान् ” ( भा० ७ | १४ | ३८) इत्यादि । 
O KING, Bhagavan is present in these different bodies in a graded manner. Therefore [because He is present to a greater extent in human beings than in subhumans],' human beings in particular are worthy recipients of honor (patra), in accor- dance with the extent and manner to which the Self (ātmā) [or the immediate awareness thereof (jnana)] is present to them. (SB 7.14.38)2 
तस्मात् तारतम्यवर्तनात् पुरुषः प्रायो मनुष्यः पात्रम् । तत्र ज्ञान्यादिकं विशिष्टमिति भगवद्वर्तनस्यातिशयात् । तत्राप्यात्मा यावान् यथा ज्ञानादिपरिमाणादिकस्तथासौ पात्र- firgef: 11 
In the second line of the verse, the word tasmat, "therefore,' means "because of the gradation of Bhagavan's presence" (täratamya-vartanat), and the word puruşa means “a human being" (manusya). So, because of the gradation of Bhagavan's presence in different bodies, human beings in general are wor- thy recipients of honor (patra). Among human beings, those in whom jñāna is developed are especially worthy of honor, because Bhagavan is present to them to a greater extent. And 
1 This and the next bracketed insert are Sridhara Svami's comments. 
2 
teşv eva bhagavan rajams taratamyena vartate 
tasmat patram hi puruso yavan atma yatheyate 
484 
289 Honorability Accords with the Degree of Awareness of Bhagavan 
even among those of developed jñāna, the extent and manner to which the Self (ātmā) is immediately present proportionate to the measure of jñäna determines their degree of honorability (pătra). 
Commentary 
IN THE VERSE cited here, Śrī Narada specifies awareness of Bha- gavan as the criterion of eligibility to receive honor and charity. This implies two things. First, this eligibility is primarily found in human beings, because subhumans do not have the capacity for such awareness, except in rare cases. Secondly, even among human beings, the degree of honorability is proportionate to the extent of a person's awareness of Bhagavan. The word atma in this verse can mean either Paramātmā or the awareness of Him (jñāna). The word puruşa, referring here to human beings in general, also implies the presence of their indweller, Paramātmā, for He who abides (sete) as the Immanent Self (antaryami) in the dwelling place (pura) of the body is known as Puruşa (antaryami-rupeņa purau sarire sete iti puruṣaḥ). 
485 
