+++
title = "301"
+++
Offenses to Devotees in the Matter of Worship 
३०१ । महतामनादरस्तु सर्वनाशक इत्याह (भा० ४ । ३१ । २१ ) - 
DISRESPECT (anādara) of highly realized devotees (mahat ), however, brings total ruin, as Śrī Nārada informed the Pracetas: 
न भजति कुमनीषिणां स इज्यां हरिरधनात्मधनप्रियो रसज्ञः । श्रुतधनकुलकर्मणां मदैर्ये विदधति पापमकिञ्चनेषु सत्सु ॥ ९७१ ॥ 
Bhagavan Hari, who is a connoisseur of the aesthetic delight of divine love (rasa-jnah ) ' and whose dearest loved ones (priya) are those who have abandoned all material wealth and whose only wealth is the Immanent Self (ätma) [i.e., Bhagavan],2 does not accept the worship of those of polluted intellect, who, due to the pride of education, wealth, lineage, or accomplishments, disre- spect His authentic devotees (satsu), who are devoid of all sense of ego and possessiveness ( akincanesu ). ( SB 4. 31.21 ) 3 
अघनाश्च ते आत्मधना भगवदेकधनाश्च ते प्रिया यस्य सः । रसज्ञो भक्तिरसिको हरिः । के कुमनीषिण इत्यपेक्षायामाह - श्रुतेति । पापमपराधम् ॥ श्रीनारदः प्रचेतसः || 
1 
3 
Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti comments that the compound rasa-jnah, referring to Bhagavan, means "He who is conversant with the aesthetic delight (rasa) of the prema of His devotees, who invest their sense of belongingness (mamata) in Him alone, giving up all attachment for wealth, children, and so on.” 
2 Sridhara Svami 
na bhajati kumanisinam sa ijyam harir adhanatma-dhana-priyo rasa-jnah sruta-dhana-kula-karmanam madair ye vidadhati papam akincaneşu satsu 
542 
301 Offenses to Devotees in the Matter of Worship 
The compound adhanatma-dhana-priyaḥ [referring to Bhaga- van Hari] means "He whose dearest loved ones (yasya priyah) are those who have abandoned all material wealth (adhanah) and whose only wealth is the Immanent Self (atma-dhanah)." The compound rasa-jñaḥ [also referring to Bhagavan Hari] means "He who is a relisher (rasikah) of the aesthetic delight of bhakti." Who are those of polluted intellect (kumanīṣināḥ)? In anticipa- tion of this question, Narada answers in the second half of the verse that they are those who, due to the pride of education and so on, disrespect Bhagavan's devotees. The word papam in this context refers to offenses (aparadham). 
Commentary 
To disrespect OR OFFEND a great devotee is more grievous than to disrespect the deity. Bhagavan can tolerate an offense commit- ted toward His own Self but not toward His devotee. Disrespect of devotees comes under the namāparādhas described earlier (in Anuccheda 265). There is no separate atonement prescribed for such an offense. Either one has to supplicate the offended devotee or undergo the reaction. Offenses toward a devotee are so severe that even devotees on the perfectional stage of bhava (the first dawn- ing of divine love) can fall from that status, or their bhava can be demoted from a higher to a lower grade of being (BRS 1.3.54). 
Śrī Nārada hints at the root cause of this offensive mentality. He says that it is due to pride, which may arise due to various rea- sons, such as high birth, education, wealth, beauty, and notewor- thy accomplishments. Bearing this in mind, Śrī Caitanya Mahāpra- bhu offered a golden rule to uproot the tendency toward offenses namely, by humility, tolerance, extending respect to others, and not hankering for respect. 
Sin (papam) means to engage in an act that is forbidden accord- ing to the Veda or Smrti scriptures. It is related to the law of karma. An offense (aparādha) is also a forbidden act, but it is associated with bhakti. Because bhakti is directly related to Bhagavan, an offense is directly displeasing to Him. Therefore, an offense is 
543 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
more damaging to its executor than a sin. Although these are two different things, the word papam is sometimes also used for an offense. 
544 
