+++
title = "302"
+++
Disrespect to a Great Devotee Results 
in Ruination 
३०२ । किं च ( भा०५/१०/२५ ) - 
MOREOVER, King Rahugana confessed to Sri Bharata: 
न विक्रिया विश्वसुहृत्सखस्य साम्येन वीताभिमतेस्तवापि । महद्विमानात् स्वकृताद्धि मादृङ् नङ्क्ष्यत्यदूरादपि शूलपाणिः ॥ ९७२ ॥ 
Although psycho-physical alterations [incited by my disrespect (mamāvajñā-kṛta)]' are altogether absent in you, who are a friend of the benefactor of the entire cosmos and devoid of all ego, being situated in absolute equality of vision, yet, even a king such as I, who wields the scepter of power like the trident- bearer Siva, will be instantly destroyed due to my disregard of a great devotee, such as you. (SB 5.10.25)2 
स्पष्टम् ॥ रहूगणः श्रीभरतम् ॥ 
The meaning here is self-evident. 
2 
Sridhara Svami 
na vikriya viśva-suhrt-sakhasya samyena vitabhimates tavapi mahad-vimanat sva-krtaddhi madrn nanksyaty adūrād api sula-paniḥ 
545 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
Commentary 
RAHUGANA states that Bhagavan is the benefactor of all. Moreover, He is the basis of His devotee's establishment in equal vision. This implies that by His essential nature, He tolerates offenses toward Himself. But He is especially intolerant of an offense toward His dear devotee. Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa took a vow not to wield a weapon in the battle of Kuruksetra. But one day, when Arjuna's life was in danger due to the ferocity of Bhisma's fighting, He jumped down from Arjuna's chariot and ran to attack Bhisma to protect His devotee. 
It is thus to be understood that an offense to a great devotee should be avoided at all costs. This does not mean that one can be disrespectful to beginning or intermediate level devotees. One should avoid offenses to all devotees. It is not easy to determine who is great and who is small. A humble-looking devotee may actually be a great devotee or may be on the way to becoming one. In fact, one should not disrespect anyone, devotee or nondevotee, knowing well that Paramatma resides within all beings. 
546 
