+++
title = "313"
+++
The Secret behind Sisupala's Attainment 
३१३ । यतस्तस्य सा न सम्भवति ( भा० ७।१।१६) - 
[SISUPALA'S ATTAINMENT of Bhagavan Vasudeva was indeed astonishing,] because this should not have been possible for him, as implied by Yudhisthira's next statement: 
एतद् वेदितुमिच्छामः सर्व एव वयं मुने । भगवन्निन्दया वेणो द्विजैस्तमसि पातितः ॥ १०१४ ॥ 
O sage, we are all anxious to find out the secret behind this attainment. Previously, King Vena' was cast into the darkness by the brahmanas because of his blasphemies against Bhaga- vän. [Therefore, as in the case of Vena, it should have been only fitting for Sisupāla to fall into hell.] (SB 7.1.16)2 
तमसि नरके - बहुनरकादिभोगानन्तरमेव पृथुजन्मप्रभावोदयेन तस्य वामनपुराणे सद्ग- तिश्रवणात् ॥ 
1 
The word tamasi, "into the darkness," means "into hell" (narake). In Vamana Purana, it is described that after suffering in hell for a long time, Veņa attained an auspicious destination (sad-gati) 
There is an alternate spelling of the name "Vena" as "Vena," without the diacritic mark under the letter "n." Both are accepted as legitimate. 
2 etad veditum icchamah sarva eva vayam mune 
bhagavan-nindaya veno dvijais tamasi patitah 
The bracketed insert is Sridhara Svami's comment (tasya tu vena-van naraka-pata evocita). 
641 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
through the influence of the birth of King Prthu [who appeared by churning the right arm of Vena's dead body]. 
Commentary 
KING YUDHISTHIRA marveled at Sisupala's attainment of libera- tion and inquired from sage Narada how such a thing was possi- ble. Earlier, there was a king named Vena, who was blasphemous toward Bhagavan (cf. SB 4.14). He forbade all performance of yajña or worship of Bhagavan (SB 4.14.6). Moreover, he declared himself as Isvara (SB 4.14.24). After his death, he was cast into hell. So how is it that Sisupala did not have to suffer the same fate? This is the implication of Yudhisthira's statement. 
The deliverance of Vena because of the influence of King Prthu is mentioned by the devas and brahmanas as follows: "The Vedic statement, 'By the influence of a [virtuous (sat)] son, a father wins ascension to the upper celestial abodes,' is certainly true, because even the sinful Vena, who was killed by the curse of the brahmanas, was delivered from hell [by the influence of Pṛthu]" (SB 4.21.46)* 
The details of the story of Vena's falldown and his deliverance by his son Prthu are described in chapter 47 of the Vamana Purāna. There it is said that after his death, King Vena was born as a mleccha and suffered from leprosy. Once, sage Narada visited King Prthu, who asked him about his father's present condition. By his yogic power, Narada came to know of Vena's birth as a mleccha. Later, King Prthu went to the mleccha land and found his father there. He brought him to his kingdom and later was able to have him deliv- ered from the body of a mleccha by the power of a holy pilgrimage and by the grace of Siva. 
Here a doubt may be raised. Jīva Gosvāmi says that Vena suf- fered in hell for a long time, while according to the version of Vamana Purāṇa, he became a mleccha. The Bhagavata verse cited 
3 
Sri Jiva Gosvami from Krama-sandarbha. 
4 
putrena jayate lokan iti satyavati srutiḥ 
brahma-danda-hatah papo yad veno'tyatarat tamah 
642 
313 The Secret behind Sisupala's Attainment 
in this anuccheda (SB 7.1.16) also concurs that Veņa was thrown into hell (tamasi pätitah). How is this apparent contradiction to be reconciled? 
The answer is that hell does not necessarily mean a specific place. Krsna says that "an excess of ignorance is hell" (narakas tama-unnahaḥ, SB 11.19.43). A subhuman birth or birth as an igno- rant human being is also a state of tamas and is comparable to hell (adho gacchanti tamasah, GITA 14.18). Therefore, Vena did not go to hell per se. This conclusion is also consistent with the state- ment of the brahmanas cited above, which affirms that when Vena was falling into hell by the curse of the brahmanas, he was deliv- ered by Prthu, who thus fulfilled the meaning of the word putra, "a son." Etymologically the word putra means "he who protects (tra, i.e., trayate) his father from the hell known as put" (Manu- smrti 9.138)5 
5 
pun-namno narakad yasmat trayate pitaram sutah tasmat putra iti proktah svayam eva svayambhuva 
643 
