+++
title = "15 TIRUMALA UNDER THE CHOLAS"
+++

One of the earliest Chola inscriptions of the temple is Madiraikonda Ko-Parakesarivarman alias Parantaka I, who ruled from 905 to 953 A.D. (232 and 234-G.T.). Both these register the gift of a lamp apiece in the 20th and 29th of the regnal year of the King. 232-G.T. also refers to an assembly or Sabhai in Tiruchchokunar (modern. Tiruchanur) which shows that the divi- sions of the country were the same as those that existed in the time of the Pallavas. The Cholas on the conquest of Tondamandalam seemed to have maintained the administrative system of the Pallavas which was readily available to them. 

58

Irungolakon alias Gunavanaparajitan arranged for the feeding of two brahmins through the deposit of some gold (220-G.T.). He was probably an officer serving under the same king Parantaka I. 

Though there is no direct evidence of Parantaka II Sundara Chola, still one of the inscriptions (17 T.T.) re-engraved under the orders of Vira Narasimha Yadavaraya, on the renovation of the central shrine of Sri Venkatesvara temple at Tirumala, registers the presents made in the 16th year of Raja Raja I, of a pattam of gold set with precious stones by Parantaka- devi-amman, described as the queen of Pon-maligai-tunjinan. It is known from other inscriptions that Parantaka II, Sundara Chola was the "King who slept at the Golden Hall". These two bits of evidence show that Parantaka-devi-amman, the donor of the pattam to Tirumala, was the queen of Sundara Chola. 

Rajaraja I is represented by three epigraphs (17-T.T. 214 and 215-G.T.) The first has already been noted as that of the Parantakadevi-amman who presented to Sri Venkatesvara a pattam weighing 52 kalanju of gold and set with six rubies, four diamonds and 28 pearls. The other two epigraphs are fragmentary. The first registers a part of the prasasti, and the other mentions his name and registers the payment into the treasury of the temple by one Arulakki or Rajaraja Muvendavelan of 40 kalanjus of gold for a lamp to the Lord. 

In the first year of the reign of Rajendra Chola, a local Officer held an enquiry regarding the non-performance of the duty of lighting 24 oil lamps and one light of camphor by the Sabhaiyar of Tirumundiyam and set matters right(20-T.T.). In this epigraph full details of the enquiry are available in which the chieftain called upon the administrative officers and the servants of Tiruvengadeva to state if any want or defect was observed in the matter of the nimandappadi, or the daily food-offerings made to the deity. They declared that the assembly of Tirumundiyam, a devadana village of the deity, which had received 23 pon (gold coins ) and thereupon undertaken, in pursuance of a previous agreement engraved on stone, to light in the temple of Sri Ven- katesvara 24 lamps including one of camphor, had failed in their trust by ceasing to burn 22 lights, and maintaining only 2, on the plea of the inability of the villagers. The enquiry impressed the Adhikari with the negligent behavior and breach of trust on the part of the Tirumundiyam assembly and he ordered the transference to the temple funds of the 20 pon of the Tirumundiyam sabha- iyar available at Tiruchanur together with 3 pon standing to the credit of Tirumundiyam assembly in the temple-treasury for their service rendered to the temple making up the original capital of 23  pon, and enjoined on the managers of the temple the duty of supplying ghee to, Tirumala for the lamps in conjunction with the supply from the stores at Tirumala of all other articles of daily use in the temple, and seeing to the maintenance of the 24 lights including the one of camphor. 

Fragments of Kulottunga's historical introduction are preserved on a few detached slabs at Tirumala. The queen of Kulottunga I made arrangements for offerings of milks and curds to the temple (71-T.T.). No. 126-G.T. from Sri Govindaraja's temple in Tirupati dated in the 19th year of Rajaraja III throws light on the functions and powers of the local political assemblies and on the process of representation or petition to the king for grant of land to the temple. The periya-nattar of Tirukkudavur-nadu had instilled an image of Tirumangaiyalvar in the temple of Sri Govindaraja but had not provided for his daily propitiation. Sri Sathakopadasar-pillai and three others consulted together and placed the subject before the sabhiyar (assembly) of Tiruchanur who met in full numbers in the assembly-hall of the temple and resolved upon it. This resolution of the sabhiyar, which in effect would amount to no more than a commendatory endorsement, was fully approved by the king who ordered it to be given effect to. The Tirukkudavur-nattar executed the royal order by assigning within the limits of the village of Kudavur a piece of land yielding grain at the rate of 5 tumbu per patti as measured with the measure known as the Chalukki. The want of daily provision was thus met by the Periya-nattar themselves who had previously installed the Alvar, and the document was attested by the Periya-nattuvelal on the consent of the men of Tirukkudavur being signified and the approval of the Periya-nattar being given to it. 

