+++
title = "17 TIRUMALA UNDER PANDYA SUBORDINATES THE YADAVARAYAS"
+++

The chieftains of this family, who governed part of Tondamandalam first as Chola subordinates, then as Pandya feudatories and subsequently as inde- pendent rulers, were ardent devotees and patrons of Sri Venkatesvara. Vira- Narasingadeva is the earliest member of this family to be connected with the temple of Tirumala. This Chieftain gifted a village to the temple for the supply of rice, vegetables and ghee every day (164-TT). Tirukalattideva, another member, assigned some land in the village of Avilala to the temple (170-TT). Virarakshasa Yadavaraya also granted some land (293-TT). The queen of Viranarasinga presented 64 cows and two bulls for setting up two perpetual lamps (381-TT). In the 40th year of the rule of Viranarasinga, a certain Tiruppullanidasar, a visiting pilgrim, obtained the ruler's permission and renovated the shrine of Sri Venkatesvara (17-TT). This chieftain per- formed the Tulabhara ceremony at Tirumala and made Venkatagiri equal to mount Meru (371-TT), Another chieftain of this family, Tiruvenkata- natha, gifted a village as sarvamanya for conducting the Adi-tirunal for the god (189-TT). His father-in-law and mahapradhani Singaya-dannayaka, instituted an offering named Sitakara-sandhi in the temple (195-TT). A record dated in the third year of the rule of another member of this family, Sriranganatha, refers to flower gardens, mathams etc., on the hill and mentions the Hunting festival of Sri Venkatesvara (354-TT). Another record dated sixteen years later, mentions the metallic image, Malaikuniyaninra-perumal and his Nachimar (I-106). One more record mentions of Vasanta festival (1-113). Hobala Yadavaraya presented to the god an ornament for his band, obviously to the lower right hand which is in the varada pose (56,A-TT). 

From these epigraphs some interesting details regarding the procedure for grants is known: 

61

No. 165-T.T. indicates the method of making grants of lands or villages by the kings. The Sthanattar of the temple submitted a petition for the grant of land probably in Agarapparru, which was considered by the nadavar of Kudavur-nadu and Tondapadiparr and latterly endorsed by the Variyavima- nattan. The king was pleased to grant the request exactly as it was made in the petition, and his order issued orally was communicated by the Yadavaraya. This confirms the procedure observed during the Chola administration, particularly under Rajaraja III (No. 126-G. T.). 

