+++
title = "19 TIRUMALA UNDER THE SANGAMA DYNASTY"
+++

The first ruler of the First or Sangama dynasty who can be easily recognised in the temple epigraphs is Harihara II, mentioned in No. 103-TT. dated in Saka 1309, Prabhava. But there are three earlier records belonging to the reign of Bukka I (Nos. 487, 237 and 238, and 485-TT.) though the king is not mentioned in any of them, No. 487-TT. which is undated and fragmentary, registers the grant of a village to the temple for a sandhi (offerings) twice a day in the name of Bukkarayan and this Bukkarayan-Sandhi is again referred to in No.44 TT. dated in Saka 1379. 

Mahamandalesvara Mangideva, a prominent feudatory, set up a golden kalasa on the sikhara of the vimana of the temple in 1369 A.D. (237-TT.) after gilding the sanctum (238-TT). A minister of Kumara Kampa gifted 28 cows and a bull. (373 and 485 T.T.) In 1388 A.D. a certain Mullai Tiruven- kata Jiyyar instituted the Masi-tirunal in the temple in the name of Harihara Raya, the then reigning King (103-TT). A record of 1390 A.D. mentions the Tiruppavai or the festival during which psalms were sung within the hearing of the processional image and his consort (57-TT.) Another record, dated 

62

three years later, refers to the Vidayyarri day of each of the festivals celebrated at Tirumala (43-TT.). The Kodai-tirunal is referred to in an inscription of 1404 A.D. (340-TT.). 

No. 103 TT. belonging to Harihara II, records the institution of a festival for Sri Venkatesvara in his name in the month of Masi and an arrangement for its conduct by the head of a Srivaishnava Matha through the payment by him of 100 panam each year, being the income of the village of Pungodu. Probably the agent was given possession of the village also. This agency of a religious head would seem to indicate the slow pervasion among the kings of the First Vijayanagara dynasty of Vaishnava influence which bore its first fruits in this temple in the resuscitation of the Vedaparayanam during the reign of Devaraya II through the efforts of Mudaliyar Tirukkalikanridasar Alagappiranar and in the construction of mantapams and gopurams and the establishment of feeding-houses, flower-gardens, festivals and other services and charities together with the grant of villages towards their expenses by Saluva Narasimha at the instance of Kandadai Ramanujayyangar. 

Devaraya II is represented by half a dozen inscriptions. In Saka 1351, Saumya (5-12-1429 A.D.) he made a grant of three villages and a gift of 1200 pon for certain daily offerings (188-TT.), while in Saka 1355, Pramadicha (22-11-1433 A.D.), he granted, on the recommendation of Udaiyar Devanna-Udaiyar, the half share of the Raja-Bhandaram (Royal treasury), in the village of Siddhakuttai alias Srinivasapuram, yielding probably 200 panam annually as in the case of the other half belonging to the Sri- Bhandaram (temple-treasury), to the 24 brahmins engaged for the Veda- parayanam during its rehabilitation in that year after a temporary abeyance (Nos. 89 and 149-TT). This village is said to have been situated in Kottala- sthalam, a sub-division of Vaikunda-valanadu. Though the Kottam (district) is not mentioned, it is known that both the Vaikundavalanadu and the Tiruk- kudavur-nadu were comprised within the Tiruvenkatakottam, a district of the Chandragiri-rajya. 

In addition to Devanna-Udaiyar, another Officer of Devaraya II Mallanna is referred to in an inscription of Saka 1330 Sarvadhari (13-3-1409 A.D.). He seems to have been originally appointed to administer the Mysore country, and later on transferred to the governorship of Chandragiri. Saka 1330 mentioned above, is probably the year of his taking over charge of the Chandragiri Rajya. He made arrangements for a naivedyam and nitya dipam to Sri Venkatesvara. 

63

The next date that occurs for him is Saka 1339, Hevilambi (25-8-1417 A.D.) (No. 88-TT.), and at this time he completed the construction of the Tirumamani-mantapam in front of the central shrine, from the stone basement to the roof and the eaves, and probably the renovation also of the Ananda- vimana over the Sanctum (No. 235-TT.). His latest known date is Saka 1366 Raktakshi (2-10-1444 A.D.) (No. 64-TT.), which takes us to within half a dozen years towards the close of Devaraya II's reign. He was Probably  transferred in Saka 1367, in succession to Irugapa-Odeya (Ar. Sur. Rep. for 1907-08, page 248, foot-note 10). 

No. 92-TT., a Sanskrit verse in the Sardula-vikridita metre calls him 'amatyasekhara,” and this rank is the same as that of the Mahapradhana which was conferred upon the ministers, governors and viceroys of Vijayanagara, and which Mallanna is seen to have been honoured with, as early as Saka 1309 during the time of Harihara II. From the uniform mention of his residence in Chandragiri in all the three inscriptions separated by long intervals of time, it may be inferred that he governed the Chandragiri-rajya continuously from Saka 1330 to 1366. But what position Devanna-Udaıyar held in Saka year 1355, whether he was serving in the Chandragiri-rajya or the Sadaliyarajya, is not known. 

Mallanna was the son of Devarasar, and the disciple of Gopinathayyan. From the mention of his discipleship and the assumption of the cognomen Sri-Madhavadasar, he appears to have been of a highly religious turn of mind. 
