+++
title = "21 TIRUMALA UNDER THE TULUVA DYNASTY"
+++

The Temples of Tirumala received royal patronage during the period of the rule of this dynasty. The most famous rulers of this line, namely, Sri Krishnadevaraya and Sri Achutaraya were ardent devotees of Sri Venka- tesvara and gave the Lord many presents and offerings. 


## TIRUMALA UNDER KRISHNADEVARAYA. 

Krishnaraya is represented by nearly fifty inscriptions in the temple belonging to himself and his two queens Chinnajidevi and Tirumaladevi. They range in date between Saka 1434 (1513-A.D.) and Saka 1445 (1524 A.D.) and register personal offerings and direct gifts made during their frequent visits to the temple of Sri Venkatesvara on Tirumala, whom he venerated as his Patron-God, as well as the edicts of grants issued by him from his capital city of Vijayanagara. As in the case of his charities elsewhere, Krishnaraya's gifts in the Tirumala temple also are generally recorded in the three South Indian languages Telugu, Tamil and Kanarese, as if indicating his sway over the entire Southern India in which they were spoken. 


### His First visit to God Tiruvengalanatha. 

His first visit to Sri Venkatesvara's temple was made in company with his two queens on the 5th lunar day of the bright half of Phalguna in the cyclic year Angirasa, corresponding to the Saka year 1434, equivalent to the 10th February 1513 A.D., when he presented a kiritam (crown) of gold set with the nine kinds of gems, and 25 silver aratis (plates) for waving lights of camphor. This is recorded in eight epigraphs of which two are in Telugu (Nos. 2 and 582 TT.) three in Tamil (Nos. 84, 356 and 696 TT.) and two in Kanarese (Nos. 31 and 40 TT.) in their respective scripts, while No. 550-TT. in Kanarese language is written in Nandı-Nagari characters. Similarly the gifts of his two queens of a golden cup apiece for offering milk to the Lord is registered in two sets of three Kanarese (Nos. 8, 39, and 483, and 9, 34 and 484 TT.), three Tamil (Nos. 85, 359 and 694 and 86, 355 and 695 TT.) and two Telugu (Nos. 12 and 699, and 11 and 700 TT.) inscriptions in their proper scripts and two (Nos. 635 and 638 and 636 and 637 - TT.) in Kanarese language in Nandi- Nagari characters. 


### His Second Visit: 

The second visit, without his queens this time, came close upon the first within the next three months, on Monday, the 12th day of the dark fortnight of Vaisakha in Saka 1435, Srimukha (2nd May 1513 A.D.), when he gave a number of ornaments for the Lord and three small kiritams for the processional images of Sri Venkatesvara, Sridevi and Bhudevi, which are 

68

again recorded in three languages, No. 1-TT. in Telugu, No. 41-TT. in Tamil and Nos. 95 and 96-TT. in Kanarese. 


### His Third Visit: 

The third visit of Krishnaraya to the temple was about a month and a half later and fell on Monday, the 11th lunar day of the bright half of the Ashada month in the same cyclic year Srimukha, Saka 1435 (13th June 1513 A.D.), when he granted five villages to God Venkatesa with libations of water to serve for the expenses of His nitya-naivedya, and the conduct of the vatsara-mahotsava in the Tamil month of Tai which he instituted for Sri Venkatesvara for the merit of his father Narasa-Nayaka- Vodayalu and his mother Nagajammamgaru, the grant to take effect from the first day of the Telugu month of Sravana (No. 459-TT.). From the nearness of the date to the previous occasion and from the visit that is reported to have been made by him to the Kalahasti temple on the same day (Nos. 151 and 162 of 1924), it is possible that the grant was made by Krishnaraya at Tirumala in the presence of God Venkatesa. 


### His Fourth Visit: 

Another opportunity was availed of by Krishnaraya to pay his obeisance for the fourth time to God Venkatesa, during his return to his capital city of Vijayanagara after pursuing Prataparudra Gajapati as far as Kondavidu and capturing the Udayagiri fortress during his first campaign against the Gajapati in Saka 1436, Bhava, on Thursday, the full moon day in the month of Ashada (6-7-1514 A.D.). This time he had a *kanakabhishekam *performed for God Tiruvengalanatha with 30,000 varahas, presented some ornaments to Him, and arranged for His daily offerings for which he granted Talapaka village in the Pottapinanti-sima. From the donor's share of a quarter of the prasadams offered daily in his name, he stipulated for the issue of a portion to Ranga-Dikshitulu, Siva-Dikshitulu and Tiruppanipillai and the balance to the latter for being utilised for feeding Brahmanas in the satram (Nos. 201, 254, and 256-TT.). 

Of his two queens who accompanied him to Tirumala from the military campaign, Chinnadevi presented a padakam (pendent) and a kanthamala (necklace) and gave Mudiyur village in Tonda-mandalam to serve for the daily offerings instituted by her with a similar provision for issue of the donor's share to Tiruppanipillai, a quarter for himself and three-quarters for the same satram (Nos. 202, 257 and 262 TT.), while Tirumaladevi presented a padakam and arranged for similar offerings and distribution from the produce 

69

derived in grain and coin from the village of Piratikulattur in Cholingavarapattu (Nos. 203, 255, and 261-T.T.). One of the above donees, Ranga-Dikshitulu, was the father of Krishnaraya's purohita Yagnanarayana-Dikshita who also appears to have followed the royal party to Tirumala and offered 10,000 chakrams to the temple for certain services only four days later, i.e., on the 10th July, 1514 A.D. (Nos. 192 and 254-T.T.). The father must have also followed the king so as to be the recipient of the granted prasadam. 

A set of four epigraphs in four languages, Telugu, Kanarese, Tamil and Sanskrit (Nos. 579, 580, 619 and 620-TT. respectively), introduces us to Krishnaraya's halt at Vijayanagara, on Thursday, the 3rd day of the dark fortnight of Kartika in Saka 1437, Yuva (25th October 1515 A.D.) and the presentation of a navaratna-prabhavali or makaratorana for God Tiruvengalanatha. 


### His Fifth Visit: 

For the fifth time Krishnaraya visited Tirupati and paid his respects to God Venkatesa on Friday, the 10th day of Pushya in the cyclic year Dhatu, Saka year 1438 (2-1-1517 A.D.) (No. 578 TT.), which happened at the end of his wars against the Gajapati king. This epigraph narrates the events of his campaigns up to the performing of the Tulapurusha-mahadana at Amaresvara and returning thence to Vijayanagara, and then continues that Krishnaraya, while ruling, started on a conquering expedition against Kalinga proceeded to Bejavada, seized Kondapalli fortress, captured alive Prahararaja- Siraschandra-Mahapatra, Bodajana-Mahapatra, Bijjilikhan and others who were in the fortress, gave them assurance of safety for their lives, and, after reducing Anantagiri, Undrakonda, Urlagonda, Aruvapalli, Jallipalli, Kondi- konda, Kappuluvayi, Nallagonda, Kambhammettu, Kanakagiri, Sankaragiri, and other forts, in the Telugu-rajya in a single campaign (in one assault), reached Simhadri-Potnur planted a pillar of victory and performed a mahadana there, thence returned to Rajamahendravara, had mahadanas performed at the hands of his queens Chinnadevamma and Tirumaladevamma and then went back to Vijayanagara. He was present at Tirumala on the above date, paid his homage to God Tiruvengalanatha and gave a kanthamala (necklace) and a padakam (pendant) for Him, and also 30,000 varahas for gilding the vimanam over the sanctum, together with the grant of tolls (sumkamu) from Tirupati relating to Godagar-nadu (Kudavur-nadu) amounting to 1000 varahas to serve for the expenses of conducting the weekly ablutions (pulikapu) and the taxes known as nityamulavisannadu and talarikammadarikam from Tirupati relating to Godagar-nadu amounting to 500 varahas for the morning offerings of God. Krishnaraya then returned to Vijayanagara and was ruling there. 

The next record No. 576-T.T. of Krishnaraya's offering at Tirumala is dated on Thursday combined with Svati being the 5th lunar day in the bright fortnight of the Tamil month of Kanya in the cyclic year Bahudhanya, Saka 1440 (9-9-1518 A.D.). and registers that he had the Divya-vimana of Tiruvenkatamudaiyan gilded with gold after returning to Vijayanagara from Rajahmundry. This inscription (No. 576-T.T.) is preceded by an introduction in Tamil which recapitulates the events of his campaigns against the Gajapati in terms identical with those of No. 578 noticed above. During his last visit on 2-1-1517 A.D. Krishnaraya paid 30,000 varahas for gliding the vimanam and the gliding was completed by 9-9-1518 A.D. This gliding is also recorded in Telugu (No. 577 T.T.) which purports to be a summary of the inscription (No 576 T.T.) in Tamil. 

*His Sixth Visit.*

Inscription No. 697 of 1922 from Kamalapuram in the Bellary district states that Krishnaraya visited the temple of Tiruvengalanatha with his senior queen Tirumaladevi in Saka 1440, Bahudhanya, i.e., on 16th October 1518 A.D. only within five weeks after the gilding of the vimanam, and granted some land for the merit of (Prince) Tirumalaraya Maharaya, that is, for the prosperity of his new born son in the very year of his birth (Mad. Ep. Rep. for 1923, para 79, page 119). He must have felt himself greatly blessed on the birth of the son, and so hastened to offer his adoration at the feet of his Patron-God Tiruvengalanatha and invoke His blessings for the health and prosperity of the baby. But unfortunately his happiness in this respect was cut off after six years only when this Prince Tirumalaraya breathed his last (S.I.I., Vol. V, p. 383, No. 1004). 

*His Seventh Visit, *

For the seventh and last time, Krishnaraya visited Tirumala and paid his obeisance to God Tiruvengalanatha on Sunday, the 11th day of the bright half of the Telugu month of Phalguna in the Vikrama year, Saka 1442 (——-17-2-1521_M.D.), and himself presented a pitambaram set with the nine kinds of gems, a cap (kullavu) with pearls, diamonds, emeralds and sapphires embedded into it, two fly-whisks set with the nine kinds of gems, a padakam and 10,000 varahas. He also presented a navaratna-padakam through his queen Tirumaladevamma. These gifts of Krishnaraya and his queen are also recorded in No. 578-T.T., as their offering subsequent to his gift of 30,000 varahas towards the gilding of the vimanam. There are four other epigraphs registering these gifts of the king and the queen on this date, Nos. 301 and 594-T.T. in Kanarese, No. 302 - T.T. in Tamil and No. 586-T.T. in Telugu and Nandi-Nagari characters, but all these four do not give the detailed narration of the wars with the Gajapati which No. 578 gives us. 

The last time that we come across Krishnaraya's offerings at Tirumala is in Saka 1445, Svabhanu, on Tuesday combined with the star Asvin, the 7th day of the bright fortnight of the Tamil month Makara (12th January 1524 A.D.) (No. 246-T.T.). This inscription registers the transference of two houses and house-sites at Tirumala and Tirupati by the Sthanattar of Tirumala to the Madhva teacher Srimat Vyasatirtha-Sripada-Udaiyar, together with the issue of certain prasadams from the temple which Krishnaraya arranged for being offered through the grant of the perayam of the 'Purattasi-tirunal and the proceeds of half of the village Kadaikuttanpadi situated in Ul-man- dalam and of the full villages of Tallapakkam, Piratam, Darattur, Mudiyur, Chatravadi, and Turaiyur, all situated in Pura-mandalam. It appears from this inscription that with the donor's quarter share of the offered prasadam, was maintained a satram where Brahmanas were fed and that later on Krishnaraya ordered the issue of a part of the donor's share to Vyasatirtha for distribution in his Mathas, which were required to be constructed on the site of the houses now granted to him. A portion of the site now granted to the spiritual teacher was originally the property of one Nambi (temple- priest) Sirrappayan on whose misappropriation of some temple-jewels the house was confiscated to the temple-treasury by Narasimharaya Maharayari ¿.e., Saluva Narasimha. Of the villages mentioned above, Darattur, Chatravad, and Turaiyur are observed to have been granted by Krishnaraya on 13-6-1513 A.D (Nos. 330 and 459 T.T.), Talapakam on 6-7-1514 A.D. (Nos. 201, 254 and 256 T.T.), Mudiyur on the latter date by Chinnajidevi (Nos. 202, 257 and 262-T.T.) and Piratam, possibly Piratikulattur, by Tirumaladevi (Nos. 203, 255 and 261 - T.T.). Kadaikuttanpads occurs in no other inscription, while Karakampevati or Karakanambadu noticed in Nos. 330 and 459-T.T. is not included in the above list in No. 246-T.T. Probably these terms are variants of Kadaikuttanpadi of No 246-T.T. 


## (b). TIRUMALA UNDER ACHYUTARAYA. 

Achyutaraya, the half-brother and successor of Krishnaraya on the throne of Vijayanagar, is represented by a large number of inscriptions of this collection. His earliest mention occurs in No. 318-G.T. which registers the construction of a wooden car for Raghunatha, i.e., Sri Rama or Sri Kodanda 

72

Rama of Tirupati, by Kumara-Ramanujayyangar for the merit of Achyutaraya Maharaya. The record is dated on the 18th day of Tai in the cyclic year Virodhi, corresponding to the Saka year 1451 (equivalent to Friday, 14th January 1530 A.D.); but Achyutaraya had already begun to rule when his coronation was first celebrated at Tirupati where he was bathed in the water poured out of the conch in the hand of Lord Venkatesa. 


### His First Visit to Tirumala: 

As in the case of Krishnaraya, we do not come across any frequent visits of Achyutaraya paid to the temple of Sri Venkatesvara, notwithstanding his rich presents and gifts to it and other charities at Tirupati. One definite occasion is however noticed, viz., the solar month of Kumbha in the cyclic year Nandana, current with the Saka year 1454, equivalent to 31st January 1533 A.D. On this occasion of his visit to Tiruvenkatamudaiyan he was accompanied by his queen Varadaji-amman and his son Kumara-Venkatadri, and he performed the mahadanams Kapila pasu (Kapila-dhenu) and Svarna- varsham (Suvarnameru, Kanchanameru or Mahameru), and presented to God Venkatesvara a big kapha (garment for the body) fully decked with pearls, rubies, emeralds and diamonds; four pon valaiyam (bahu-valaiyam), a pair of uchchippu set with gems for the head; a kuttam ornamented with diamonds for the top of the crown; a long string of pearls and other jewels consisting of differently shaped gold beads and nuts. At that time he also conducted the Archana himself to Sri Venkatesvara, while the Archaka recited the Srinivasa-sahasranama (No. 453-T.T.). This visit of Achyutaraya to the temple of Sri Venkatesvara on the 31st January 1533 A.D. took place more than a year since he went on a war with Tiruvadi (Travancore), and levied tribute from him, brought under subjection Tumbichichi-Nayaka and Saluva-Nayaka, and planted a pillar of victory on the banks of the Tamra- parni after marrying the daughter of the Pandya sovereign, and had in con- junction with his queen Varadambika and (his son) Chika-venkatadri severally performed the Mukta-Tulabhara ceremony in the presence of Lord Hari at Kanchi in Saka 1455, Nandana (14-7-1532 A.D.), in commemoration of his victory (Mad. Ep. Rep. for 1924, para 45; and No. 178 of 1924). 


### His Second Visit: 

A second visit of Achyutaraya to God Venkatesa may be inferred from his two records, Nos. 544 and 546 - T.T. dated in Saka 1457, Manmatha (—26th December, 1535 A.D.). On this occasion he instituted two new festivals, viz., the Lakshmidevi-mahotsavam to be celebrated for Tiruvenkatamudaiyan and Alaimelmangai-Nachchiyar for five days, and the Punarvasu-tirunal for 

73

Raghunathan (Sri Rama), Nachchiyar (Sitadevi) and Ilaiya-Perumal (Lakshmana) on each of the 13 days of the Punarvasu star occuring in the year. Towards the expenses of the festivals, Achyutaraya granted to the temple the uttarayam of 300 rekhai-pon and 60 rekhai-pon respectively from the villages situated in the Kondavidu-sirmai and stipulated for the supply of all articles from the Sri Bhandaram. 


### His Third Visit: 

The third visit of Achyutaraya to Sri Venkatesvara's temple at Tirumala is indicated from the personal gifts made by some of his officers, viz., Bachcharasayya, Rama-Bhatlu, Adaippam Visvanatha-Nayaka, Salakaraja Singaraja, Immadi Ellappayya and Krishnappa-Nayaka in Saka 1458, Durmukhi (12.1.1537 A.D.), when each of them made a donation of 15,000 narpanam to the Sri-Bhandaram for the propitiation of the deity with 300 appa-padis yearly on behalf of each one of them. No. 396-T.T. records the grant of the village Mallapuram on the above date by an officer of Achyutaraya whose name is lost, made on the suggestion of Achyutaraya Maharaya himself, for the propitiation of Tiruvenkatamudaiyan on the seventh days in each of the eight Tirukkodi-tirunal held at Tirumala, with the stipulation that the donor's quarter share of the offered prasadam might be delivered to a certain Appayyan. 

About a year and a half prior to his first visit to Tirumala in Saka 1454, Nandana, Achyutaraya had provided with steps of granite stone the Kapila- tirtham which he renamed “chakratirtham ” as being sacred to God Tiru vengalanatha, and also constructed Sandhya-vandana-mantapams on the east and west sides, and planted stones bearing the discus of Vishnu (Sudarsana- sila or Tiruvalikkal) at the four corners of the pond excavated in rock. Three of these inscribed stones are visible, while the fourth is built into a parapet wall of a later building. They are dated in Saka 1453, Khara (25th June 1531 A.D.) and record, in the three South Indian languages Telugu, Kanarese and Tamil, this charitable service rendered by Achyutaraya through the laying of the stone steps and the construction of the mantapams for the attainment of the four human ends (chaturvidha-purusharthasıddhi). (Nos. 206, 207 and 208-G.T.). 

Besides these charities, Achyutaraya had also built a temple in Tirupati for Achyuta-Perumal in the land belonging to the village of Kottur which was a tiruvidaiyattam of Tiruvenkatamudaiyan and established an agraharam of 120 houses built round the temple, after paying12400 narpanam into the Sri-Bhandaram (temple-treasury) of Sri Venkatesvara as compensation for 

74

the site taken up. To facilitate the daily worship of this deity, be granted the village of Parittiputtur dividing it into 20 shares assigned to this new temple. In Saka 1460, Vilambi (8-2-1539 A.D.) he made a gift of 100 out of 120 houses in the agraharam to the Brahmanas who occupied them at the time with all rights of possession, succession, sale, mortgage, transfer gift, etc., but reserved the 20 houses the occupants of which had also enjoyed the 20 shares of the village of Parittiputtur assigned to the temple of Achyutapperumal (No. 355 - G.T.). The reservation must have been occasioned by the suspicion of a prospective evacuation of the houses by their inmates who, probably being archakas, paricharakas and other servants of the temple, were responsible for the conduct of the daily worship, and the fear therefore of an eventual cessation of the puja of the deity in the case of such an evacuation. 

This agraharam of Achyutarayapuram must have formed the northern suburb of Tirupathi situated at the foot of the hill in which a ruined tower now stands with raised grounds of concrete and debris and broken idols and stones to its immediate west indicating the existence of a temple in the past there. 

In addition to these services of Achyutaraya in the cause of Hindu religion, he had also sent a number of damsels to Tirupati from his capital City of Vijayanagara to serve God Venkatesa in their humble way and live on the prasadam granted to them from the temple. Muddu-Kuppayı, daughter of Kuppayi and grand-daughter of Srirangaraja, with the biruda Vidvat- sabharaya-Ranjakam, was one of these Emperumanadıyars and she was deputed by the king in Saka 1453, Khara (6-6-1531 A.D.), for service in the temple (No. 1 G.T.) She was enjoined to reside permanently in Tirupati and maintain herself with the one plateful of prasadam ordered to be issued to her every day from the temple of Sri Govindaraja. She was further required to see to the continuance of this peculiar service through her descendants. 

Hanumasani, daughter of Uttida Timmayan, was another such damsel. The epigraph No. 422 T.T., which registers her gift of 820 narpanam to the temple in Saka 1461, Vikarı (21-1-1540 A.D.), for providing certain offerings to God, states that she was one among the damsels resident in Tirupati who had been assigned to the temple by Achyutaraya. 

An inscription of 1561 A.D. states that Aravidu Tirumalaraya constructed an Unjal-mantapam in the Sampangi-Pradakshinam and that Saluva Narasimha instituted the Unjal-festival (633 - T.T.). This record enumerates the festivals celebrated in the temple at this time viz., Pavitrotsavam, Sahasra namarchanam, Sahasrakalasabhishekam, Adhyayanotsavam, Vasantotsavam, - 

75

Damanarohanam, Unjal festival, Pendli-tirunal, Lakshmidevi festival, Kodai tirunal, Floating festival, Pallavotsavam, Phalotsavam, Mesha-samkramanam, festival conducted on Amavasya, Purnima, Dasami, Ekadasi, Dvadasi, Rohini, Mrigasirsha, Punarvasu, Uttara, Mula, Purvashadha, Uttarabhadra, Sri Jayanti, Urai-adi, and Uttana-dvadasi, Arpasi-puradham, Deepavali, Yugadı, Kartikam, Makara-samkramanam, Padiyavettai, Tai-pusam and Tanniramudu, (633 - T.T.). One record of 1564 A.D. mentions the Rathasaptami festival (376 - G.T.). 

It is known from an inscription dated 1586 A.D. that a certain Avasaram Chennappa constructed the Kalyanamantapa (150 - T.T.). A record of 1614 A.D. mentions the Ramapattabhishekam festival at Tirumala celebrated in the Venrumalaiyittan-mantapam on the day next to the Sriramanavam, day and the practice of reading the Vayupuranam during the festival (686- T.T.). Two records of 1623 A.D. state that Matla Anantaraja presented several vehicles like the Svarnasva, Gaja, Samarabhu-palavahana, Padmapitha and Unna-tukkelimantapa, and that he built the Galigopuram on the stepped pathway (VI-25-26). The same chieftain is said to have built the Kotta- gopuram near Alipiri (279-G.T.) 
