+++
title = "22 Tirumala under SadasIVARAYA"
+++

Sadasivaraya the next king has in the walls of Tirumala temple engraved nearly a hundred and fifty inscriptions most of which begin with his introduction A peculiar feature of this prasasti is that to the king is ascribed not only the lordship of the eastern, southern and western oceans which fringe the Peninsula, but also that of the northern ocean that is non-existent in the case of India itself. The earliest date that is available for him in these epigraphs viz., Thursday combined with the star Punarvasu, the 12th day of the dark fortnight of the Karkataka month in the cyclic year Plava, current with the Saka year 1463, corresponding to the 21st July 1541 A.D., which occurs in 659 - T.T. Registering the gift of Muttur and another village to the temple by Srirama- Bhattar, son of Yandalur Tirumalai-Josyar, is about eight months anterior to the latest date furnished for his predecessor Achyutaraya in No. 504-T.T. viz., Thursday combined with the Star Ardra, being the 7th day of the bright fortnight of the Mina month in Plava, current with Saka 1463, corresponding to the 23rd March 1542 A.D. It has been stated that Sadasivaraya had been chosen crown prince already in Saka 1459, Hevilambi (1537 A.D.), nearly five years earlier (Ar. Sur. Sept. for 1908-09, page 193), and this statement seems to be supported by the surname “Sadasivapura " found to have been 

76

given to Devarayapura in No. 89 of 1912 from Lepakshi dated in Saka 1460 Vilambi l.e., one year later. 

The latest date available for Sadasiva is Saka 1495, Srimukha, Kumbha (20th January 1574 A.D.), furnished by No. 133 - G.T. which registers the gift of a certain Aravidu chief. But the latest date found for him elsewhere is Saka 1497, Yuva, Rishabha, corresponding to 9th day 1575 A.D., and it is surmised that this later date only suggests the continuance of the nominal rule of Sadasiva even after Tirumala I had practically assumed the reigns of government in Saka 1493, as indicated by the imperial titles that are attributed to the latter in his records dated in the same Saka year 1493, in place of the Mahamandalesvara-biruda given for him in the records dated upto Saka 1492 (Mad. Ep. Rep. for 1919, para 45; and Ar. Sur. Rep, for 1911-12, page 180). Sadasiva's reign therefore extended over a period of about 40 years from Saka 1459 to Saka 1497, including his co-regency during the last years of Achyutaraya. 

Two visits of Sadasiva to Sri Venkatesvara's temple are indicated. The first one occurred in the month of Kumbha in Saka 1475, Pramadicha (3-2-1554 A.D.), when he granted with libations of water a portion of the prasadams, arranged by Achyutaraya Maharaya for Tiruvenkatamudaiyan and utilised for his satram till then, to a certain Srinivasan and others; and the grant was executed by Aliya-Ramarajyadeva Maharajayya (No. 393-T.T.). The other visit is mentioned to have taken place on the auspicious occasion of the Makara Sankramam which occurred prior to the Karkataka month of Saka 1476, Ananda, i.e., in the year Pramadicha on the 28th December 1553 A.D. (No. 417 G.T.). It is recorded that Sadasıvaraya Maharaya then granted with libations of water, as a sarvamanya gift, the taxes ullayam, perayam, makamai, mulaivisam and taraku on all loads except on those of teppattu, pachchaivadam, ney and ennai, brought to Tirupati on 200 pack- bullocks impressed with the hamsa-mudra (swan-mark), together with the melakai, makamai, kodai and other taxes from the Padaivittu-rajyam, Senji, Tiruvadi, Ponagri (Bhuvanagiri), Pattanam (Kaveripattanam), Solamandalam, Tiruvannamalai, Kanchipuram, Chandragiri-rajyam, Palaiyam, Palaverkadu, Mudupanakarai, Pattanam and Perunkondai-Sirmai, as well as the ayam, arupu, ullayam, perayam, mokamai, mulaivisam and taraku from the remaining sirmais, for the benefit of the Nammalvar-Ramanujakutam built by Sriman Mahamandalesvara Kondaraja, son of Ramaraja-Konetiayya of the Atreya- gotra, Apastamba-sutra and Yajus-Sakha. It is also stated that the rayasam (royal writ) was communicated to the chiefs of all the sirmais concerned as also the Sthanattar of Tirupati. These sirmais and rajyas roughly composed 

77

the middle portion of the Vijayanagara empire which comprised of further territory in the north extending upto the Krishna river and in the south bordering the ocean. 

A few grants of the king to private individuals also come to notice. It is mentioned in No. 651 - T.T. that be granted a village near Perunkondai (Penugonda) to one Padandayar, son of Timmarasa-Padandayar, who made a gift of half of the village to the temple in Saka 1468, Prabhava Simha (19-8-1546_A.D.), for daily offerings for Sri Venkatesvara. The half village was accounted to yield 100 gatti-varahan annually. A similar gift of the village Periya-Ekkalur in Jagadapi-Gutti-Sirmai, together with a deed of grant exocuted on a copper-plate, to Srinivasayyangar, son of Sottai Ettur Tirumala- nambi Kumara-Tatayyangar of Sathamarshana-gotra, Apastambha-sutra and Yajus-sakha is registered in No. 415 - G.T., dated in Saka' 1469, Plavanga, Mithuna (3-6-1547 A.D.), when it was handed over to the temple by the dones for providing for offerings daily and on festive occasions, and for conducting Pallavotsavam started by him at the time. The yearly income from the village is said to have been 2000 chakram-pon; and to yield such a large income the village must have been very extensive and highly fertile A third case relates to an exemption of taxes from the village Mutyalapattu for which Tallapakam Tirumalayyangar, son of Annamayyangar, secured a rayasam from Sadasivaraya Maharaya, and tirumukam from Ramarajayya. Inspite of irrigation facilities provided for this village through a tank which was improved by Tirumalayyangar at a cost of 100 pon, its soil appears to have been so poor as to yield a return of only 280 rekhais annually at the time when Tirumalayyangar endowed it to the temple in Saka 1467, Visvavasu, Karkataka (3-7-1545 A.D.) for the conduct of the festival started by him (No. 681 - T.T.). 
