+++
title = "२३ सिद्धोपायशोधनाधिकारः"

+++

॥ श्रीः ॥  
॥ श्रीमते निगमान्तमहादेशिकाय नमः ॥  
॥ श्रीमद्रहस्यत्रयसारे सिद्धोपायशोधनाधिकारः ॥

(23) THE CHAPTER ON THE CLARIFICATION

OF WHAT IS MEANT BY THE UPĀYA

THAT IS ALREADY EXISTENT.

(SIDDHOPĀYA) page290

<details open><summary>विश्वास-प्रस्तुतिः (सं॰प॰)</summary>

युगपदखिलं प्रत्यक्षेण स्वतस्सततं विद-  
न्ननवधिदयादिव्योदन्वानशक्यविवर्जितः ।  
जलधिसुतया सार्धं देवो जगत्परिपालयन्  
परमपुरुषस्सिद्धोपायः प्रतीष्टभरस्सताम् ॥ ५१ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>मूलम् (सं॰प॰)</summary>

युगपदखिलं प्रत्यक्षेण स्वतस्सततं विद-  
न्ननवधिदयादिव्योदन्वानशक्यविवर्जितः ।  
जलधिसुतया सार्धं देवो जगत्परिपालयन्  
परमपुरुषस्सिद्धोपायः प्रतीष्टभरस्सताम् ॥ ५१ ॥
</details>

The Supreme Person who knows all things, at the same time, by direct perception (pratyakṣa) and without any aid or instrument (in the form of sense organs), who is the boundless and divine ocean of mercy, protects the world, with the daughter of the ocean (Lakṣmī ), being omnipotent. Having accepted the responsibility of saving those who follow the right path, He is the upāya [^62] that is already existent.

[^62]: By Siddhopāya, the author means Bhagavān who is the upāya already existent for those who perform prapatti. By Sādhyopāya he means such upāyas or means as bhakti and prapatti which socure the Lord's favour so that He may act as the Siddhopāya.

RECAPITULATION OF THE CONTENTS OF

THE FIRST PART:

We have already described below how the jīva ( Kṣetrajña), who has been wandering in saṁsāra from beginningless time, becomes averse to it by the mercy of God which is awaiting an opportunity (to help him), how he understands from the right śāstras (the truth about ) the tattvas, the means or upāya and the ultimate goal or aim of life, and how he becomes eager to attain mokṣa . (We have already described,) how he adopts ( owing to this desire for mokṣa  ) an upāya or means (bhakti or prapatti) which is in accord with his fitness or competency, how he thereby does what should be done, how, having realised his state as a prapanna or bhakta, he renders faultless service in accordance with that state and in accordance with the s'astras, for the remaining term of his life here. (We have already described,) how, after the fall of the body, he reaches a region free from the touch of matter (prakṛti) by journeying along the shining path beginning with archis and bow he attains there the supreme end, namely perfect service which is the overflow of the unlimited enjoyment of Bhagavān.

THREE CAUSES BY WHICH THE LORD'S

GRACE IS WON:

There are three main causes for the removal of the will of the Lord imposed on men as a punishment for past sins, owing to which the jīvas who are subject to the sway of past karma have no clear knowledge concerning the upāya that is already existent (namely Bhagavān), the upāya by which His favour is secured (Sādhyopāya) and also the potency of these upāyas. They are as follows:- One is the speech that comes from the lips of Lakṣmī : If one asks, “May this Śaraṇāgati by mine!" Her reply is "Let it be yours; everything will be obtained by it alone." Next is the grace of the goodācārya and the third is the observance of the tradition of the righteous. The means (vyāja) by which the grace of the good ācārya  can be secured and the benefits arising therefrom may be understood from the episodes of [^63] Parāśara, Maitreya, Sañjaya, Aśvalāyana and others.

[^63]: By the advice of Vasiṣṭa, Parāśara put a stop to the performance of a satra (sacrifice) which was aimed at the destruction of Rākṣasas. Pleased with this, Vasiṣṭa and Pulastya blessed him for his forbearance with a knowledge of the śāstras and with the gifts necessary for the composition of a purāṇa. Maitreya studied the Vedas, the dharma śāstra s and the Vedaṅgas from his guru and, by his grace, obtained a knowledge of Vedānta  by which he realised how the origin, maintenance and destruction of the world occur and how there is nothing other than Viṣṇu .

Sañjaya says:- "By the grace of Vyāsa, I listened to this supreme Yoga, the most secret of all, from Kṛṣṇa Himself the Lord of all Yogas". Aśvalāyana learnt the Rig Veda by his devotion to Śaunaka.

The observance of the tradition of the righteous consists in this :--

Full of the quality of sattva, and entering his career of discipleship in the right manner and with perfect attention and concentra. tion of mind, one should learn from the good ācārya  who is without any expectation of renown, wealth or honours and who is under the sway of compassion, the truths concerning the tattvas and the means or hita, which have come down in regular succession to the present day from the Lord of All, who is the first ācārya of all. While imparting instruction, there should be no unnecessary elaboration and no skipping over points that require clear exposition. The instruction received is such as follows:- Madhava (the Lord of Lakṣmī ) is both the father and the mother of all the worlds. O, best of men, seek refuge under that Saviour by śaraṇāgati". To those who are faithful and pious but who are not competent to enter on the difficult study of the śāstras, which might, owing to their difficulty, unsettle the wind, this instruction by the guru is alone important. To others, the study of the śāstras with the proper exercise of reason is legitimate for their own clear understanding and for convincing those who are deluded by the specious arguments (of rival thinkers ).

FORMS OF INFIDELITY:

It has been said, "He who understands dharma prescribed in the Vedas and the smṛtis with the help of arguments not opposed (to the spirit of) the Vedas and stāstras - he alone knows dharma, and not others." Those who have not understood dharma by the proper exercise of reason will become rationalistic (and sceptical) and will misinterpret the true meaning with specious arguments inconsistent with the Vedas; it has been stated that "by the followers of Kanada (Vaiseshika logicians), the followers of Sakya (Buddhists ) and the heretics, the dharma ordained in the Vedas has disappeared."

This misinterpretation or denial is of two kinds--- that concerning the glorious possessions (vibhūti) and that concerning the One who possesses these glories. That concerning the One who possesses the glories consists in denying the existence of the Supreme Ruler, the Lord of Lakṣmī , or declaring some other deity as the Supreme Ruler and relegating the real Supreme Ruler to the category of His possessions (vibhūti). The misconception or misinterpretation concerning the glories consists in this : denying the existence of these glories (or objects created by God) or considering these vibhūtis as existing but as independent of the Lord by denying their relationship to Him, or declaring that they are dependent on oneself or others,

ASSOCIATION WITH WICKED MEN SHOULD BE

AVOIDED:

Any one of these forms of denial might occur in the case of a weak-minded man who has performed prapatti, on account of association with those who are not fit to be associated with If such a misconception should occur, it is worse "than the great sin of taking back a thing that has been given away (to charity)". That sin will deprive a man of the merit acquired by all previous gifts made from the time of birth onwards. Bat this is worse, for the object of the gift was itself acquired by stealth from the person to whom it was given later, and then the person is robbed of what was given to him. Therefore, of the many causes of delusion, association with rationalists (and sceptics) is most to be avoided. This has been declared in passages like the following:

“These who are heretics opposed to the Vedas, those who do things forbidden in the śāstras, those who are like cats (deceiving others ), sceptics, rationalists who depend only on reason, those who are like cranes ( ever injuring others who are near them) - these should never be honoured even with words "; so it is said also:-"A man  #suffering from starvation may beg money of a king, of his own pupil, and of the men whom he has helped to perform a sacrifice ( yajna); But one should never beg of those who are dissemblers, rationalists, heretics and men with the nature of cranes." Again, “One should associate with good men (i.e. men who know God.) Whether in dispute or friendship, one should associate only with them; one should never do any of these things with the wicked (those who do not believe in God), “Give up the company of the wicked; associate ever with the good; do whatever is righteous, both in the day and in the night, remember always that you yourself and those who are related to you are not immortal.” And again, "Far better is it to dwell in à cage of flaming fire than to commit the crime of dwelling with sceptics, who do not countenance any thought of Śaurī (Bhagavān)."

Conversation with rationalists makes men foolish in spite of their seeing, 'as their knowledge is lost by specious reasoning.' (this association with rationalists ) removes men from every one of the four classes which Iśvara calls His own, in the śloka  : “My "people" are of four classes and they are all known to be my bhaktas." It would take them away from the group of men whom Śrī Raṅganātha calls "lads who are worthy of His love." It would throw them into the midst of those who are outside the range of Bhagavān's love as declared in: " There are wicked men who do not seek my protection by performing prapatti; they are of four classes : fools, men who are vile, men who have lost their knowledge by specious reasoning and men who are of the nature of the Asuras."

Even men with supreme faith that have sought the protection of the Supreme Ruler who is the Saviour of those that have no one to protect them - even they[^64] , we know. become deluded by association with others; though they are not cast away, they have afterwards to be corrected by good ācāryas.

[^64]: Embar became subject to misconceptions owing to his association with Yādavaprakāśa and had to be corrected by Peria Tirumalai Nambi.

Have not the great sages declared :- "If there were only one śāstra, it would be possible to acquire knowledge free from doubts. Because there are many śāstras in this world, it is exceedingly difficult to obtain knowledge that is true" and again, "The Lord " dwells in all who are free from doubt. The Lord of Lakṣmī  never dwells with those who are full of doubt owing to the exercise of free thinking."

It is true that it has been stated: "In those  who have bhakti to Puruṣottama, there is no anger, no hatred, no covetousness nor impure minds", but this is applicable only to those individuals who are perfect in the possession of spiritual qualities. In the case of those who have yet to ascend to that high spiritual level, it is well-known that their minds may become deluded. Thus it has been said "We hear that the gods (devas), in dread of the diminution of saṁsāra among those who are devoted to Govinda, become their enemies, (i.e. try to hinder devotion)" and again, "To "truthfulness in speech, there are a hundred hindrances; to tapas or the performance of austerities, the hindrances are a thousand; and bhakti to Govinda meets with ten thousand hindrances". Here we will first speak of the doubts (or misconceptions) that are likely to arise in regard to Siddhopāya, the upāya, namely Bhagavān, that is already existent and consider the way in which these doubts may be cleared.

( HEREAFTER THE AUTHOR STATES POSSIBLE DOUBTS AND MISCONCEPTIONS AND TRIES TO REMOVE THEM ):

Doubt (1):- No upāya is necessary on the part of the jīva :

(1) Iśvara who ignored a man from beginningless time has now  concerned Himself with him (for his protection ). This is not due to any action or work on the man's part, but only to the Lord's omnipotence. If it is not so, how is it that when the Alvar asked "The Lord has now made me realise Him and placed Himself within me. Why is it that He allowed me formerly to stray from Him?," no reply was given except that "the cloud which adorned the measureless sky thundered in music". The implication is that there is no answer to this question except that it was the Lord's will to do so. Therefore why should we perform or adopt any upāya (for securing His protection)? Some say, therefore, that, of His own accord, and at the time when He chooses, the Lord saves us and that the Lord bestows His grace on His servants and protects them when He is pleased to do so and that no endeavour of any kind is incumbent on us.

This doubt may be cleared as follows :- Although Iśvara is omnipotent, He makes the man adopt some gesture, some means (vyāja) or pretext on his part and, in consideration of it, protects him in order that the faults of partiality and cruelty (vaiṣamya, nāirghṛṇya) may not stain Him. The Alwar himself has declared this truth in :-"I said Tirumalirunjolai" and immediately, the Lord of Lakṣmī  filled my mind with His presence." (The Vyāja, endeavour, or gesture, here, is the utterance of the word Tirumalirunjolai by the Alwar). It may be asked "This vyāja, too, is adopted by the Lord's grace. Why did He not make the person adopt it before ?" The answer is as follows:- The souls of men have streams of karma flowing from beginningless time. These streams of past karma produce their respective consequences at different times and Iśvara has to bestow, on each individual, the rewards or punishments that are in accordance with such karma. If He were to do otherwise, He would be tainted with partiality (and injustice). Iśvara did not make the person adopt the vyāja before, as the time for the ripening of the fruit of the karma had not yet come. Therefore, from the effect we have to infer the cause, as stated above. If this view be not accepted, no follower of any system will be able to answer the question why a person acquires ( at a certain time) such things as eagerness for mokṣa  which did not exist before. That these are due to the varied nature of the streams of beginningless karma is the common explanation for both those who believe in Iśvara and those who do not. Iśvara's independence and omnipotence consist in His determination to protect the jīva when He chooses to do so, on the adoption of a vyāja or some form of upāya (endeavour) (or even an apology for upāya ) and in there being no power to prevent Him from doing so.

If this is so, it may be asked how we are to explain the verse of the Alvar cited before, when be put the question why the Lord did not choose to save him before and received an answer and also the texts according to which the Lord is the unconditional Saviour: Our answer is as follows:--The Alvar attaches great importance to Iśvara's omnipotence and compassion and ignores the vyāja or vyājas adopted by himself, by which special means he secured the Lord's compassion, when he says. "For Thy neglect of me in former times and for taking me into Thy favour at present, I see no prominent causes other than Thy omnipotence and compassion. But, if owing to Thy omniscience, Thou hast seen any such cause, favour me with a knowledge of it". The Lord gave no reply and thereby the Alvar revealed to the world that the primary or prominent causes were only His omnipotence and compassion. This does not mean that there was no subsidiary cause or vyāja on the part of the Alvar. From this it follows that the primary cause for making the jīva an instrument of His Līlā is His omnipotence (svātantryam) and the subsidiary cause thereof is violation of the command of the omnipotent Lord which has been flowing like a stream from beginningless time. Now the primary cause for making the jīva an instrument of His bhoga (in Paramapada) is the Lord's natural compassion. The subsidiary cause (sahakāri kāraṇa ) is the vyāja (bhakti or prapatti) which extinguishes the Lord's punishment (hitherto) acting as a hindrance or obstacle. Bhakti and prapatti which are adopted as vyāja to secure Iśvara's favour, are, themselves, the result of His compassion due to special acts of merit. These reveal Iśvara's omnipotent and compassionate nature. The prapanna should bear in mind this attribute of the Lord, His being free from partiality and cruelty (vaiṣamya and nairghṛṇya) and bondage and mokṣa  being dependent on the violation of His command and the adoption of the vyāja, respectively, as they are all based on pramāṇas. Thus it becomes his duty to lead the life of staunch and exclusive devotion with firm faith in the compassion of the omnipotent. This is the (real) meaning,

The omnipotence of one who has no compassion is dangerous to others; the compassion of one who is not omnipotent is not helpful to others and may also cause pain to the one who feels compassion. But the compassion of a person who is also omnipotent can accomplish whatever is desired and will bring delight to him and be the cause of immediately relieving the distress of those who seek his help and of giving them what they long for.

In regard to incarnations, it has been said, "In the distresses of men, ŚrīRāma is greatly distressed". (It may be asked how this distress can be reconciled with the delight spoken of above ).

It means only this: that this distress is only  in order to give delight to those who are worthy of His grace. In the case of wicked men with the nature of Asuras, the distress assumed by the avatār is to make the evil-doer become deluded into thinking that he is not Iśvara's incarnation. The great sages have declared the truth of what has been said so far in the following ślokas: "It is Bhagavān alone that rules over time and death over those that move and those that do not move. I am stating the truth to you; the Lord of all the worlds, though possessed of omnipotence and omniscience, begins to act (during incarnations ), as if He were only a weak tiller of the soil. In this way, by His association with wonderful powers, He deludes the world, bat those who seek refuge under Him are never deluded", and "Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who had large eyes, removed the burden off the earth, deluded the whole world and has now gone back to His own abode," and again "He imitates the actions of those who have the bodies of men, but the līlā of the Lord of the world is dependent only on His will". Therefore in the stories of the avatārs or incarnations, the distress is only of the nature of play.acting and that, too, has compassion as its cause. It is of the nature of lilā or sport to the Omnipotent. Have we not seen hunchbacks and dwarfs often taken into protection by kings who do not expect any return from them? It is a matter of līlā or play to them and, at the same time, the consequence of compassion. That is why it is said, "The Upaniṣads  state that the Lord of Śrī creates, maintains, controls and does such other things in regard to sentient and non-sentient things, only for His own sake. It is therefore, O, Lord of Śrīraṅga, Thy nature to be the means of salvation (upāya ) for the jīva and also the object of attainment. Therefore I seek Thee as my upāya without any thought of my own interests."

Since Bhagavān is the seat of the activity for the good of others, He is the Saviour of those who seek refuge under Him and since He places Himself in the place of other upāyas (like parābhakti) (in order to protect them), He is also the upāya. Since He is the seat of the fruit of the activity of protecting (namely, His delight), He is the śeṣī  and consequently the object of attainment. That His being all this is due to His essential nature (svarūpa) is understood from the pramāṇas or authorities which help us to know Him, Of the principal qualities of Iśvara, such as jñāna (knowledge) śakti or power and compassion, knowledge and power are qualities which come into play for both punishment and favour, whereas compassion comes into play (only) in conferring favours. Compassion, here, means, the inclination to do good to others. Bhagavān's compassion comes into play in all the following in the creation and sustenance of the three kinds of sentient beings (baddha, mukta and nitya), in keeping them in activities pleasing to the Lord, in the eternal enjoyment of the eternal sūris, in seeing that those who have obtained release from bondage do not return to saṁsāra, in the creation of all things (like mahat, ahankāra, tanmātras, etc) in lilā vibhūti (i.e.) in this world, in the pure creation called His avatār untainted with matter, in propagating a knowledge of the śāstras and in causing through them a knowledge of the tattvas and of the means of attaining mukti, in creating an eagerness for mokṣa , in enabling a person to do meritorious actions which would become the vyāja or upāya for causing the eagerness for mokṣa , in prescribing upāyas suited to the nature of each individual for wiping out the punishment for violation of His commands, in being accessory to the mind being prompted to adopt the upāya, in removing any obstacles that might stand in the way of the man who has adopted bhakti as the upāya (upāsaka) in standing, in the case of those who are destitute of other upāyas (1.6.) prapannas, in the place of these upāyas and protecting them from all danger, in ignoring countless offences of a serious nature committed by the jīva from beginningless time, by being gracious to him on account of the vyāja or upāya performed by him and releasing him from saṁsāra so that he may enjoy endless bliss, in bestowing mokṣa

immediately on those prapannas who are impatient of delay, and, in the case of those prapannas who are not impatient of delay and who have forgotten to beg for a life free from sin (after prapatti), in creating repentance for any offences committed by them owing to past karma which has begun to operate (prārabdha ) and inducing the person to perform the necessary prāyaścitta or expiation suited to his competency; in the case of those who are too hard-hearted to perform prāyaścitta, in preventing their entrance into the world of Yama and loss of the benefit begged for by them by seeing that they are punished for these offences (committed after prapatti) in this life itself with sufferings (like blindness and lameness ) - in all these the Lord's compassion is the principal and common cause.

Iśvara, who is endowed with compassion as described above, is called Siddhopāya or the upāya that is already existent; thus it is said:- “Those Brahmins who know the first part of the Veda and those who know the latter part of it, which treats of the Supreme Being - they state that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the eternal dharma (i.e.) the upāya that always exists. Bhakti and prapatti, which are adopted as the means for making Him gracious are called Sādhyopāyas (i.e.) upāyas to be adopted for securing His grace.

THE CONTENTION THAT THERE IS NO INJUNCTION

TO PERFORM PRAPATTI AS AN UPĀYA:

(2) The injunction to perform prapatti is contained in the words, "Seek refuge under me alone". Some say that it is not an injunction to perform prapatti and that this prapatti should be considered as an attribute of the person specified. We answer as follows :-- This attribute cannot be held as that of the person so concerned or qualified, as it does not satisfy the definition of an adjectival attribute[^65] . This statement is therefore contrary to pramâna or authority. If this were not so, while Iśvara is the upāya for bhakti, the śāstras which prescribe certain forms of meditation and the like might also be considered as speaking of the attributes of the person concerned and not actions to be performed.

[^65]: He who desires svarga should perform the Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice". Here, who desires svarga is an attribute or adjective of the person and the injunction is that he should perform the sacrifice. In Mam Ekam Saranam Vraja, the prapatti has to be performed after hearing the vidhi or in junction; it did not exist before, like the desire for svarga in the example cited. Therefore, it is not an attribute; besides vraja is a verb that prescribes an action.

THE ROLE OF SIDDHOPĀYA AND SĀDHYOPĀYA

(3) Therefore the exaggerated statement of some that prapatti is not an upāya is only to be taken as stressing the importance of Siddhopāya (i.e.) Iśvara who is the existent upāya (and not to state that prapatti is not an upāya ). Siddhopāya is of prime importance, because if, by proper propitiation, the punishment of the Lord is cancelled, it becomes helpful for the enjoyment or experience (of Bhagavān) which is natural to the Self (in its purity). If it is asked how this happens, the answer is as follows:-- When the gem is cleansed of the dust (enveloping it), it shines with a natural radiance, but this natural radiance is due only to the will of Iśvara that ordains its having radiance. So also the expansion of knowledge and other attributes which the mukta acquires are due to the will of Iśvara, which ordains them. Likewise, in the case of the eternal süris (their eternal possession of certain attributes is due to the eternal will of the Lord). Learned men expressed this idea briefly in the śloka  : "All things have their being in accordance with Thy will; among them some are ever pleasing to Thee; they are eternal; Thy noble attributes which are, by nature, subject to Thee illustrate this truth to us". Therefore, though Siddhopāya or Iśvara who is the existent upāya is all-important, the means of obtaining His grace, otherwise called Sādhyopāya, has also to be adopted. This is not at variance with the statements of former ācāryas as seen in Tiruvaymoli (10-8-9), cited before.

The śloka  which says: "The Lord who took the necessary means or upāya for making me live, while yet in my mother's womb - is He now asleep or is He now dead in regard to the means to be adopted for making me live after being born ?" - this is sometimes quoted in support of the statement that the Lord is alone the upāya and that the jīva has to do nothing at all by way of upāya or vyāja. It should be taken only as meaning that we should not seek any other protector (and not to forbid man from any form of endeavour). Otherwise one will have to give up evon such endeavours as have to be made for obtaining food.

Likewise the following s'lokas:-" The embodied being is like a lump of clay subject to the will of another and unable to help himself. How, then, can he protect another?," and " The jīva is ignorant and absolutely helpless in matters concerning his pleasures and pains. He goes to svarga or naraka being directed by Iśvara, who rules over all," and also, "Inscrutable is Bhagavān. He cannot be ordered by any one. He can go wherever He chooses. He has all beings under His control. Like a child playing with its toys, He plays with beings (and enjoys His līlā)" -- in these ślokas, what is intended to be stated is only the jīva's entire dependence (on the Lord) and Iśvara treating him in accordance with his karma. (They do not prescribe the giving up of all endeavour on the part of the jīva ). If this interpretation is not accepted for the verse in Tiruvoymozhi (quoted above ) and for these ślokas, there will be conflict with all śāstras and also inconsistencies with what has been said before,

So far we have dispelled certain misconceptions that may arise from a consideration of Iśvara's omnipotence and the compassion which is natural to Him. We will now proceed to clear doubts which might arise from a consideration of the peculiar relationship ( that exists between the jīva and Iśvara ).

(4) THE CONTENTION THAT BEGGING FOR

PROTECTION IS INCONSISTENT WITH

OUR RELATIONSHIP TO THE SESHI.

There are some who deny the need for sādhyopaya or the means or endeavour for winning the Lord's grace, by stressing the point that He is the śeṣī  for whom we exist and to whom we belong. (They argue as follows): "Iśvara is the śeṣī  and we are like His sucklings as expressed by the sages to ŚrīRāma: "We are like babies in the embryo", who ever heard of a suckling doing anything other than crying for mother's milk, such as paying wages for it? Would it be consistent with the essential nature (svarūpa) of the jīva to perform the surrender of the self (atma samarpanam), to ask for protection, to have full faith in His protection and such other things ?".

We meet this objection as follows:- The great sages and the author of Śrī Bhāṣya observed, in their own lives, the injunction about self-surrender by begging for the Lord's protection with faith preceding it. They have cited śāstras in support of this (traditional) practice and have handed it down as instructions for successive (generations). Therefore though Iśvara's relationship as the śeṣī  is eternal, He will not protect the jīva who is subject to the influence of past karma, unless the jīva adopts some form of sādhyopaya or endeavour (for winning His grace). This truth has to be accepted by every one who holds by the śāstras. If the śāstras are given up (as authorities), there will be no Iśvara at all to stand in the relationship of the śeṣī (to the jīva ).

It was stated previously that, owing to His being the seshi, Iśvara is bound to protect the jīva and that the jīva being the śeṣa is neither called upon nor able to protect himself. What was said there is (not inconsistent with what is said here).

There, with an illustration from ordinary life, the relationship between the protector and the protected was shown to consist in the protector being bound to protect and being capable of doing so. It was not meant to show that the Protector would protect in every case, whether or not there is endeavour on the part of the jīva to win His grace by propitiation. If that view were taken, it would mean that all souls should be eternally free from bondage. If it be maintained that, in the matter of protection, the Lord, being omnipotent, chooses to save some and not others, then it would mean that the Lord is partial to some and cruel to others.

Those who maintain these propositions merely on the basis of reason cannot say that the knowledge of the relationship (of the śeṣin and the śeṣa ) is alone required for securing protection and that no request for protection need be made. For have we not seen that non-sentient things, cattle, deer, birds and the like and suckling children are protected, though they have no knowledge of this relationship, just as they do not ask for protection ? If it be held that, though we have seen (such instances), yet the knowledge of that relationship is required on the authority of the śāstras, we answer that, if so, by the very authority of the śāstras, the special kind of knowledge consisting in bhakti and prapatti will also have to be accepted (as necessary).

If it be held that what is required for protection is that, while being protected, there should be, in addition to the relationship, no attempt to prevent protection, we answer that, in that case, the Lord should grant mokṣa  to all in such states as dreamless sleep (suṣupti), (where there is the relationship and no attempt on the part of the jīva to prevent protection). If, on the other hand, it be maintained that there should be no attempt to prevent protection in those mental states in which one is capable of doing so, we answer that we have seen protection of even non-sentient things which are incapable of preventing it and of even such sentient beings as cattle and sons which attempt to prevent it.

From the śloka  : "Those that have nathas (lords or protectors) in the world do not perform their duty of protecting themselves. It is their Natha or lord who puts forth endeavours on their behalf, just as Sibi and others did the duties which should have been performed by Yayāti " - from this śloka , it should not be thought that endeavour on the part of those that are to be protected is not required at all. For the word Natha is from the root nath and means, here, the begging for protection and nāthavantah in that śloka means, by the force of the termination (vat or mathup) those who have a protector. So the word nāthavantah in the śloka  suggests, by the etymological meaning of natha and by the termination (mathup) which shows the relationship (of seshin and śeṣa) that is necessary for the state of being carefree, the prayer for protection and the act of self. surrender. Otherwise there should be (as said before ) rnokṣa for all and other such objections. If it is said that the word nāthavantah ia that śloka  should not be interpreted as having a suggestion of all the meanings (referred to), we have to state that analogies taken from ordinary life should not be pressed too far in the s'astra on mokṣa , for they would be at variance with actual and explicit statements made in the śāstra).

We shall now explain the real purport of the words of trust- worthy authors where the apparent meaning would seem to be that, while Iśvara is the Protector or Saviour of all, we are not required to put forth any endeavour for our protection. Their real meaning is this.

<details open><summary>विश्वास-प्रस्तुतिः (सं॰प॰)</summary>

यदर्थन्तु कृतो न्यासस्तदर्थं न पुनः क्रिया । पूर्वमप्यपराधीनप्रवृत्तावस्य नान्वयः ॥
</details>

<details><summary>मूलम् (सं॰प॰)</summary>

यदर्थन्तु कृतो न्यासस्तदर्थं न पुनः क्रिया । पूर्वमप्यपराधीनप्रवृत्तावस्य नान्वयः ॥
</details>

When self-surrender has been performed for the sake of a certain object, there should be no repetition of that performance for the same object, (The need for the adoption of the upāya or endeavour in the form of prapatti at first is not denied ). Even before prapatti, the jīva could not act independently of the Lord.

There is no injunction for an endeavour at a later time also for protection, when once the surrender of the responsibility for protection has been made in accordance with pramāṇas. For even in that act of the original prapatti, the surrender of the responsibility for one's protection was made possible by Iśvara, out of consideration for some meritorious act performed by the jīva as a result of the ripening of past karma flowing like a stream without any beginning. Since even this prapatti was the Lord's doing, we should not be under the impression that we are protecting ourselves. We should feel that the Lord who, we are taught in the Mūlamantram, is the Protector of all that He made us adopt a certain means and became propitiated thereby so as to protect us. The (following) śloka  conveys the same idea:-- My Master Himself makes me surrender myself to Him, as I am His śeṣa and am ever subject to Him. (I surrender myself to Him) with the help of the intelligence given to me by Him and am now free from all responsibility in regard to my protection as He has taken that responsibility on Himself".

This is the form prescribed for enabling us to meditate on Bhagavān without the faults of the desire for renown, gain, honour or benefit, and of attachment to the fruit, the notion of one's being the (independent) doer and having an upāya. Therefore such things as the prayer for protection are like the child's act of suckling the mother's milk and the grace of the Lord flows like mother's milk (after the propitiation). From this it follows that (in stressing the need for the jīva's endeavour), we do not minimise the primary importance of Siddhopāya, namely, Iśvara, who is the existent upāya.

So far we have dispelled the misconceptions that might arise from a consideration of the peculiar attributes and the peculiar relationship (of śeṣa and śeṣī ) which are revealed in the word Nārāyaṇa,

(5) LAKṢMĪ IS AS MUCH THE UPĀYA AS THE LORD HIMSELF:

Hereafter we shall proceed briefly to remove certain misconceptions which arise from the relationship of spouse that is expressed in the word Śrīmat (having Lakṣmī ) as existing between Śrī and the Supreme Ruler who has consecrated Himself for the sacrifice or yajna of saving all. As stated in the following śloka, "It is said in all religious systems and in the Vedānta  that Bhagavān acts as the Saviour only in the company of Lakṣmī , who is the very embodiment of compassion". (The phrase, 'religious systems' here refers to the four Pāñcarātra systems).

There are some who hold that, in the former part of the Dvaya, the word Śrīmat is an Upalakṣaṇa[^66] ( an accidental sign by which the thing is distinguished and not a permanent attribute (or viśeṣaṇa)), whereas in the latter part, the same word means a permanent attribute of Nārāyaṇa . (If this were true, it would follow that the words 'I seek as my refuge' śaraṇam prapadye would apply only to Nārāyaṇa  and not to Śrī or Lakṣmī  who, in that part, according to them, is not meant to be taken as an inseparable attribute but as only an accidental mark to distinguish Nārāyaṇa , Since in the latter part, Srīmat is, according to them, an inseparable attribute (viśeṣana), it would follow that the dative and the namah would apply to the attribute and the substantive, viz. Srī and Bhagavān. (It would then mean that Lakṣmī  is not to be sought as the upāya but that adoration and service are due to her as well as to her spouse, Nārāyaṇa  ).

[^66]: In "That is Devadatta's field where the crane was sitting before", the crane is an Upalakṣaṇa or accidental feature to identify the field with. It is not a permanent attribute or viśeṣaṇa of the field.

In this (wrong) view, when the same word Śrīmat is found in both the parts (of Dvaya) and when there is no objection to interpreting it in the same way, in both the places, the adoption of an interpretation which is at variance with the well-known view of the ancient ācāryas and with the tradition connected with Nammalvar, the chief of all prapannas and which would give two different interpretations to the same word in the same sentence has no justification. For in the following śloka  it is said :- "O Lakṣmī , with a face delightful like the moon! When (we) try to study Thee as distinct from Bhagavān, (we feel) that His svarūpa or essential nature and His being the Ruler over all are the consequence of the greatness, which is His, by His being ever with Thee. Thou art, therefore, the part (or attribute) by which Bhagavān is understood as being of such and such a character. Since Thou and Bhagavān are thus (inseparably) united, the Veda does not speak of Thee separately".

It may be asked whether, if we take Śrīmat as an inseparable attribute of Nārāyaṇa  in the first part of the Dvaya also, it would not follow that there are two upāyas viz., Nārāyaṇa  and Lakṣmī , and whether this would not be at variance with the texts which say that there is no other upāya than Bhagavān. We counter this objection by asking whether, if we take Lakṣmī  as the inseparable attribute, as you hold, in the second part of Dvaya, it would not follow that there are two objects of attainment, namely, Bhagavān and Lakṣmī  and whether this would not be at variance with the texts which say “There is no other interest or object of attainment than Bhagavān".

If it is now asked: "In that case what is the objection to taking the word Śrīmat as only an accidentally associated mark (Upalakṣaṇa) by which Bhagavān is distinguished in both the parts of the Dvaya, the answer is as follows:--Certain qualities, certain forms ( vigrahas) and certain activities are necessary for Iśvara being the upāya. Likewise certain other qualities, certain other forms and certain activities are ever associated with Iśvara as the object of attainment. These necessary ( things ), also, would be at variance with Iśvara being the only upāya and the only object of attainment respectively. So they, too, would have to be considered as accidental features and not inseparable attributes, but this would be against the view of these critics who hold that Iśvara is the Protector or Saviour only in virtue of (such attributes as) His omnipotence and His compassion. So they cannot concede that these qualities are only accidental features (Upalakṣaṇa)

They might argue that these qualities, forms and activities are inseparable attributes (viśeṣaṇa) and not accidental features (Upalakṣaṇas), because they are useful for the purpose of protection. We reply that the same may be said ( with justice ) of Lakṣmī 's relationship as spouse, both in the first part of the Dvaya and in the second part of the Dvaya. (i.e.) (She, too, is useful for the respective purposes ). The respective uses of particular things or beings are in accordance with their nature and may be understood from the pramāṇas and from tradition. The use of a thing or of a being is determined, of course, by its nature.

The usefulness of this attribute Srī in Śrīmat, both in the part dealing with upāya and in that which treats of the object to be attained by that upāya has been described by Nammalvar in the following verses :- " Lakṣmī  who abides in the ever-fragrant lotus will destroy the karma of jīvas (i.e.) those karmas which act as hindrances to Bhagavān becoming the upāya" and "I will sweep Thy temple with the help of Thy grace and that of Lakṣmī  who abides in the lotus." (So also ) Bhagavān Vālmīki declared in The Rāmāyaṇa, the earliest of all kavyas, which is the very essence of the doctrine of śaraṇāgati"This Sītā is capable of protecting us from the great danger (confronting us), O, Rākṣasis" and "She ''is capable of saving the host of Rākṣasis from (the anger of Raghava)". Such authors as Hiranyagarbha and Kasyapa declared: “We should“ meditate on Lakṣmī , who can grant us all the benefits that we desire, who can take us safe out of the sea of saṁsāra, who becomes easily gracious and who can make us happy." ŚrīBhagavān Śaunaka has given this precept. "The man" that prays for the attainment of Bhagavān, who is the purport of all words, should perform prapatti to Lakṣmī  also." The great sage Parāśara who received the knowledge concerning the truth about the Supreme Deity from boons granted to him by Vasiṣṭa and Pulastya has stated "Thou art, O Goddess, the knowledge concerning the soul, the giver of mokṣa , the object of attainment[^67] ." Even if, in this śloka , the conferring of mokṣa  be looked upon as an adjective qualifying the knowledge of the soul, it has to be considered as her glory or vibhūti on account of the appositional use (sāmānādhikaraṇya ). The Lord of Śrī has himself proclaimed in connection with the meditation on Bhagavān as the Lord of Śrī in Śrī Sātvata Saṁhitā -"Those who meditate on Bhagavān seek the protection of Lakṣmī  and with that they easily cross the sea of saṁsāra which is constituted of these three qualities". Apart from the śāstras treating specially of Śrī, these śāstras which do not pertain to any special sect or cult are of great authority.

[^67]: The śloka  says: Thou art the knowledge concerning the self or atma vidyā: Lakṣmī  is in apposition with atma vidyā. The meaning is that atma vidyā is one of her vibhūtis or glorious possessions. Since atma vidyā can confer mokṣa , it follows that Lakṣmī  can confer mokṣa .

Aḷavandār, too, has stated:- "The whole world depends upon the glance of Śrī, for its support." and again "Without the grace of Lakṣmī , the beloved spouse of the lotus-eyed Lord, we cannot have those glorious experiences which one might desire in this life (saṁsāra), nor the experience of our disembodied self, nor the enjoyment of Bhagavān in mokṣa ". The author of Śrī Bhāṣya, in his Vaikuṇṭha   Gadya, says that she commands Adiśeṣa, Viṣvaksena and other attendants to render such service to Bhagavān as is suited to the time and the circumstance, and that the service to Bhagavān, which is the supreme goal, should be rendered in accordance with her commands. Koorathalvan too, sings his praise of Lakṣmī  in ślokas beginning with these words: "The "bounds of Thy greatness. O, Goddess, are not known to Bhagavān nor even to Thyself". These words are an elaboration of what is contained in the śloka  :- "May Lakṣmī   confer happiness (on us) --- Lakṣmī , looking at whose face, and with Her will as His aid, the Lord creates, destroys and sustains all the worlds, and grants also such things as svarga, naraka (hell) and mokṣa . Since the two are engaged in the same work and experience the same kind of delight, the Lord cannot feel happy if he performs the līlā of the work of the world without her participation in it," Bhattar, also, has commented on the word Udaara (generous ) used in the śruti  (viz., Śrī Sūktam) as an adjective for Śrī in this manner:-"How generous Thou art! O, Mother, to the man who merely raises his hands folded in worship to Thee, Thou grantest wealth, the enjoyment of his disembodied self and even paramapada and yet Thou feelest ashamed that Thou hast not done anything adequate for him." Peria Jeer, too, has brought out all these ideas in his commentary on Śrī Sukta. Thus, from what we find in the śruti , Smṛti and tradition, (the reader) gifted with insight can understand that the attribute expressed in the word Śrīmat in Dvaya has its uses, just like such things as forms (vigraha), in accordance with its own nature.

<details open><summary>विश्वास-प्रस्तुतिः (सं॰प॰)</summary>

भरस्वीकाररहितं रक्षासङ्कल्पवर्जितम् । गुणादिकमिहेष्टं हि शरण्यस्य विशेषणम् ॥  
ऐकरस्यजुषोश्शेषिदंपत्योस्सर्वकर्मसु । विशेषणविशेष्यत्वं श्रुतं कस्मान्न रोचते ॥  
प्रतर्दनादिविद्यासु वेद्येऽपि परमात्मनि ।अचेतनवदिच्छामश्चेतनञ्च विशेषणम् ॥  
इत्थं प्रपत्तिविद्यायां तत्तन्मन्त्रानुसारतः । विभुः पत्न्या गुणाद्यैश्च विशिष्टो विषयोऽत्र नः ॥
</details>

<details><summary>मूलम् (सं॰प॰)</summary>

भरस्वीकाररहितं रक्षासङ्कल्पवर्जितम् । गुणादिकमिहेष्टं हि शरण्यस्य विशेषणम् ॥  
ऐकरस्यजुषोश्शेषिदंपत्योस्सर्वकर्मसु । विशेषणविशेष्यत्वं श्रुतं कस्मान्न रोचते ॥  
प्रतर्दनादिविद्यासु वेद्येऽपि परमात्मनि ।अचेतनवदिच्छामश्चेतनञ्च विशेषणम् ॥  
इत्थं प्रपत्तिविद्यायां तत्तन्मन्त्रानुसारतः । विभुः पत्न्या गुणाद्यैश्च विशिष्टो विषयोऽत्र नः ॥
</details>

You (critics who do not consider Lakṣmī  as an inseparable) attribute or viśeṣaṇa of Nārāyaṇa  in the first part of Dvaya) maintain that such things as the qualities of the Saviour (compas. siop etc) are attributes and not mere Upalakṣaṇa, even though they cannot undertake the responsibility (bhara) of protection and cannot have the will to protect (being only qualities and therefore non-sentient). Why do you object to the idea of Lakṣmī  being the attribute (viśeṣaṇa) and Nārāyaṇa  being the substantive

(viseshya), when this divine couple have the same pleasure or relish in all actions and when they are both śeṣī s, when there is the authority of the śāstras for it? In such vidyās or forms of meditation as that of Pratardana, although the Supreme Being is the object of knowledge, we admit that sentient beings like Indra can be attributes of Bhagavān just like non-sentient qualities. Similarly in this vidyā called prapatti, the Omnipresent Lord is the object of approach with His Spouse and with such things as His qualities in accordance with what is stated in the respective mantras.

We have already stated that what is understood from the pramāṇas should not be set aside by mere logic or reason. Therefore, just as we accept the Lord with His Spouse, as the object of attainment in accordance with the wish of the Saviour, there is no objection to the Lord with His Spouse being the upāya as well.

Just as Bhagavān with particular qualities (like omnipotence and compassion) and particular forms (vigraha) indicated, respectively, by the words Nārāyaṇa and caraṇau, (the two feet) which are attributes of Nārāyaṇa  forms a single upāya, so also Bhagavān with Lakṣmī , who appears in the word Śrīmat as an attribute in the eternal relationship of being His Spouse, may without any impropriety, be considered as a single upāya. If it is said that we should give up all the attributes of the upāya in order to make the upāya single, the dharma of being an upāya (i.e. upāyatva) will have to be given up also.

It should not be thought that the substantive (here Bhagavān), when it gains some excellence from the attribute (here Lakṣmī ), should be considered as previously wanting in some excellence. Well has it been said in the śloka  :- “Thou art, O Lakṣmī,  the property of Bhagavān by Thine own will; hence, though His supreme excellence is due to Thee, His greatness is not dependent on any one else. A gem becomes valuable on account of its radiance. It does not thereby become in itself worthless; its

value, which is natural to it, does not diminish thereby, because its greatness is not due to anything else," In the same way as the substantive, (namely, Bhagavān) gains excellence from its attribute (viśeṣaṇa), namely, Lakṣmī , the substantive, too, has its own natural excellence. This is illustrated in the śloka  in the Rāmāyana :-"Just as radiance cannot be separated from the sun, I cannot remain separated from Raghava". Brightness is the natural quality common to radiance and the sun. So also ŚrīRāma and Sītā had, in common, auspicious qualities not dependent on any one else, as described in the śloka  :-"We bow to "Bhagavān and Lakṣmī , who have in their very nature, all auspicious qualities, who are the causes of the world and who are beyond all comparison".

There is nothing improper in stating that the substantive and the attribute give excellence to each other as indicated in the following: "That splendour which is ŚrīRāma is beyond all measure, for the daughter of Janaka is His". "Though she is always with Thee, Thy Lakṣmī  astonishes Thee every day as if she is new; she is in every way fit for Thee by her attributes, her forms, her sportful activity and her interest in protecting others". “Thy Śrī”  “Thou art the Śrī of Śrī" and "The Śrī of even Śrī" - these expressions show how Śrī and the Lord of Śrī are excellent in themselves and add also to each other's greatness.

By the authority of texts in the śruti  (such as "He is the Lord of the Universe", "The Spouse of Viṣṇu  who is the empress of the world", and "The syllable ma indicates that the jīva is the servant of both"), and by the authority of the following śloka , "The world of sentient and non-sentient beings is śeṣa to Lakṣmī , (i.e.) it exists for Lakṣmī : She and the world are śeṣa to Bhagavān, who is Her śeṣī . Notwithstanding this, the control of the world is common to both: the two together are śeṣī , in relation to the world". By these authorities it was determined by Somasi Andan in Shadarthasamkṣepa, that both form always a single śeṣī. In the case of certain special offerings (havis) enjoined in the Karmakāṇḍa, the offering is made to two deities like Agni and Viṣṇu as if they were single. So also in this offering of the soul called prapatti, the two may, without any impropriety, be the single recipient. As stated in the śloka, "Youth and certain other qualities are common to Thee and Bhagavān; however you have divided other qualities between you for your enjoyment and (that in this way) :- Bhagavān has manly qualities like independence of others, control over enemies, firmness and the like and Thou hast such feminine qualities as gentleness, existing only for the husband, compassion and forbearance"; the wife is ever dependent on her Lord and in the performance of yajnas or sacrifices, only the yajamāna is spoken of (as his wife who participates in the performance is implicit, as it were, in the word yajamāna, even when one yajamana is referred to). So also in regard to the teaching of the śāstras, the mention of a single person does not mean the absence of the wife who is, as it were, inseparable from her spouse. In the verse :-- "Bhakti  and prapatti are forms of knowledge which have, for their object, only Bhagavān, the Lord of Lakṣmī , who abides in the lotus and as also the knowledge called the perfect enjoyment of Brahman has only Him for its object" - in this verse this is really the meaning, viz., that Lakṣmī , being included in Bhagavān, no separate mention is made of her. This may be seen also in the passage: "Since Thousand Bhagavān are thus inseparably united, the śruti does not speak of Thee separately".

Nanjeeyar heard, from Kadambi Achan, what the author of Śrī Bhāṣyam had declared and summarised it thus:-"In places where Bhagavān is referred to, it should be understood that Lakṣmī  is also referred to".

Those whose object is only mokṣa  and who have no other aim, or interest, worship Lakṣmī  in her situation as laya (on the chest of Bhagavān) and as bloga in the image of the spouse standing by the image of Bhagavān. But just as we bow before certain images of Bhagavān (like Santānakṛṣṇa), which bestow primarily the benefits desired in this world, there is, for even mumukṣus, no impropriety in such actions as bowing before the image of Lakṣmī  installed in a separate shrine and worshipped for certain worldly benefits (adhikaarārchā), just as we should bow before our mothers, since in all images of Lakṣmī  (wherever they may be) her being the Spouse of Viṣṇu  is an established fact.

When such authoritative doctrines are seen, in the words of those who are disinterested, those who are still so obstinate as not to give up their wrong notions, are in a state described in the following śloka s:- "The fool" who clings firmly to what he has learnt before, the man who is ignorant of dharma, the man who will not have his doubts cleared by those grown old in wisdom - this man will come to grief like a blind man falling into a ditch", and “ To  those who are weak in intelligence, who are wicked, who have been bitten by the serpent of specious reasoning and whose senses have become deluded -to these men, truths appear different from what they (really) are",

In the investigation of the real meaning of the word Siddhopāya, the following passages should be remembered:- "There is nothing other than these two. The males are Bhagavān and the females are Lakṣmī ". "Just as Viṣṇu  is in all things, so also is she, O, best of Brahmins,". "The heart of this lady is fixed on ŚrīRāma and his heart is ever fixed on her. Therefore it is that she and ŚrīRāma who is the embodiment of dharma continue alive for even the fraction of an hour." "Both Bhagavān and Lakṣmī  aro omnipresent, since they are inseparably united, they are spoken of as one tattva or real." Therefore, since they form a single seshi, since they are ever of the same mind, since they are intimately attached to each other, and since they are inseparably connected with each other in their svarūpa or essential nature, and in their rūpa or forms, those who are established in sattva should understand the meaning of the word Nārāyaṇa with its adjective Śrīmat in such a manner as will not be at variance with the inseparable unity of the tattvam (Bhagavān ) with its attribute (Śrī) so well expressed in the śloka  :- "Thy essential nature svarūpa and the forms that Thou takest and the svarūpa and the forms assumed by Bhagavān are in close embrace with each other."

( The author summarises the gist of the chapter in a number of ślokas as follows:--)

The Lord of Śrī, who is the embodiment of compassion and who secures, for them, all the benefits desired by men is called Siddhopāya, because He is already an existent upāya. The ways of securing His favour are such as bhakti and prapatti and these are called Sādhyopāyas, because they can be adopted and accomplished by those who desire the respective benefits. When the Sādhyopāya flows with high mounting waves and increases the flood of compassion of the śeṣī , who is the Siddhopāya, the latter breaks through the flood of lilā which is also His. By (that very flood of compassion) all hindrances to His service, such as even the former will of the Omnipotent, disappear like dams built of fine sand. Though the acts of propitiation (like bhakti and prapatti ) are prescribed in the śāstras for securing the fruit, yet Siddhopāya is considered as of prime importance, because the Lord alone is capable of granting mokṣa , since bhakti or prapatti being non-sentient, cannot give the fruit directly and since Bhagavān alone can act directly. To those who have adopted prapatti as the primary and independent means, it is specially ordained that they should rest on the Omnipresent in order that they may know that their own endeavour perishes instantly after prapatti. Therefore with what aim, the surrender of responsibility has been made to Siddhopāya - for that aim, the man should make no further endeavour and depend only on the Siddhopāya, In the definition of prapatti in the mantra for prapatti, in the injunction concerning it and in other passages and so also in Śrī Bhāṣya and the like and by tradition, Brahman is declared as the upāya. Just as we admit that certain (holy) places and the like which exist already are called dharma productive of spiritual excellence, so also it is said by those who understand the truth that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the eternal dharma (or upāya ). This Siddhopāya is to be thought of in the three mysteries or mantrās in such as the syllable a in aum etc.

<details open><summary>विश्वास-प्रस्तुतिः (त॰प॰)</summary>

मन्नुमनैत्तुऱवाय् मरुण्माऱ्ऱरुळाऴियुमाय्त्  
तन्निनैवालनैत्तुन् दरित्तोङ्गुन्दनियिऱैयाय्  
इन्नमुदत्तमुदालिरङ्गुन् दिरुनारणने  
मन्नियवन्सरण्मऱ्ऱोर्बऱ्ऱिऩ्ऱि वरिप्पवर्क्के. (34)
</details>

<details><summary>मूलम् (त॰प॰)</summary>

मन्नुमनैत्तुऱवाय् मरुण्माऱ्ऱरुळाऴियुमाय्त्  
तन्निनैवालनैत्तुन् दरित्तोङ्गुन्दनियिऱैयाय्  
इन्नमुदत्तमुदालिरङ्गुन् दिरुनारणने  
मन्नियवन्सरण्मऱ्ऱोर्बऱ्ऱिऩ्ऱि वरिप्पवर्क्के. (34)
</details>

Nārāyaṇa , with His Spouse Lakṣmī , who is staunch in being every kind of relation (to us ), who is the sea of compassion that dispels ignorance (and delusion), who shines sustaining all (things and all beings ) with His mere will, being the Supreme Lord without a second and who takes compassion on us on account of ( Śrī), the nectar born of sweet nectar - Nārāyaṇa  with Śrī is the firm refuge of all who seek His protection having no other support.

<details open><summary>विश्वास-प्रस्तुतिः (सं॰प॰)</summary>

विश्राम्यद्भिरुपर्यपर्यपि दिवानक्तं बहिर्दर्शनै-  
रस्मद्देशिकसंप्रदायरहितैरद्यापि नालक्षितः ।  
स्वप्राप्तेस्स्वयमेव साधनतया जोघुष्यमाणश्श्रुतौ  
सत्त्वस्थेषु भजेत सन्निधिमसौ शान्तावधिश्शेवधिः ॥ ५२ ॥
</details>

<details><summary>मूलम् (सं॰प॰)</summary>

विश्राम्यद्भिरुपर्यपर्यपि दिवानक्तं बहिर्दर्शनै-  
रस्मद्देशिकसंप्रदायरहितैरद्यापि नालक्षितः ।  
स्वप्राप्तेस्स्वयमेव साधनतया जोघुष्यमाणश्श्रुतौ  
सत्त्वस्थेषु भजेत सन्निधिमसौ शान्तावधिश्शेवधिः ॥ ५२ ॥
</details>

The treasure (of gold - viz. Bhagavān), which is not seen is within them, because they are guided by heretical systems which have not the benefit of the traditional knowledge of our spiritual teachers -(the treasure which they fail to perceive) even though resting on it night and day (as in suṣupti) -- the treasure which is proclaimed in the strutis to be itself the means or sādhana for its attainment - that boundless treasure will make its presence (felt) among those who are pure of mind.

इति श्रीकवितार्किकसिंहस्य सर्वतन्त्रस्वतन्त्रस्य श्रीमद्वेङ्कटनाथस्य वेदान्ताचार्यस्य कृतिषु  
श्रीमद्रहस्यत्रयसारे सिद्धोपायशोधनाधिकारः त्रयोविंशः ॥  
श्रीमते निगमान्तमहादेशिकाय नमः ॥
