+++
title = "26"

+++


26. If it be objected that (Brahman is) not (denoted) on account of the metre being denoted; (we reply) not so, because thus the direction of the mind (on Brahman) is declared; for thus it is seen.

The previous section at first refers to the metre called Gāyatrī, 'The Gāyatrī indeed is everything' (III, 12, 1), and then introduces--with the words 'this is also declared by a _Rik_ verse'--the verse, 'Such is the greatness of it (viz. the Gāyatrī),' &c. Now, as this verse also refers to the metre, there is not any reference to the highest Person.--To this objection the second part of the Sūtra replies. The word 'Gāyatrī' does not here denote the metre only, since this cannot possibly be the Self of all; but the text declares the application of the idea of Gāyatrī to Brahman, i.e. teaches, to the end of a certain result being obtained, meditation on Brahman in so far as similar to Gāyatrī. For Brahman having four feet, in the sense indicated by the _rik_, may be compared to the Gāyatrī with its four (metrical) feet. The Gāyatrī (indeed has as a rule three feet, but) occasionally a Gāyatrī with four feet is met with; so, e.g., 'Indraś śacīpatiḥ | valena pīḍitaḥ | duścyavano vr̥shā | samitsu sāsahiḥ.' We see that in other passages also words primarily denoting metres are employed in other senses; thus, e.g., in the saṁvargavidyā (Cḥ. Up. IV, 3, 8), where Virāj (the name of a metre of ten syllables) denotes a group of ten divine beings.

For this conclusion the next Sūtra supplies a further argument.

