+++
title = "1 Mughals, Kachvāhās"
+++
1 Mughals, Kachvāhās and the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003018742-1

## Introduction 

In the sixteenth century, Vṛndāvana became a centre of focus for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, visible by the migration of key teachers of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect into Vṛndāvana. They arrived in order to fulfil the ambitions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya 1  in re-establishing the pilgrimage sites relating to Kṛṣṇa’s activities in Vṛndāvana. 2  This endeavour was led by teachers such as Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī who had relocated to Vṛndāvana. It is worth considering that Caitanya did not direct to Vṛndāvana for this task associates who were perhaps considered closer, but instead selected associates who had experience engaging with political figures and power. Rūpa and Sanātana had previously held senior standings within the administration of Sultan Husain Shah of Bengal. This effort was supported by Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, the son of wealthy landowners, and Jīva Gosvāmī, the nephew of Rūpa and Sanātana who became responsible for purchasing land in Vṛndāvana to establish important pilgrimage sites. 3  Indeed, Vṛndāvana was thrust into the religious landscape of North India especially considering that preceding the arrival of the Vaiṣṇava reformers, 4  such places of pilgrimage relating to Kṛṣṇa’s activities had almost disappeared. 5  

Prior to this period there appears to have been a scarcity of awareness of Kṛṣṇa’s connection to the area, although there existed *purāṇic* tales relating to sites of pilgrimage associated with this region. Indeed, from excavations in the first century BC and AD there is evidence of Nāga and Yakṣa cults, and even Buddhist and Jain artefacts within the Mathurā district spanning until the Gupta era. In the Gupta Age *brahminical* icons and the first Kṛṣṇa-Gopal images appear. However, neither the inscriptional nor textual evidence indicates the prominence of Vaiṣṇava practices during the Gupta period. 6  Furthermore, Mathurā’s history is also obscure, magnified by the numerous attacks that Mathurā encountered. For instance, Mahmud of Ghazni raided the city for 20 days in 1017 AD. It is through Mahmud’s travel reports that we garner an insight into the splendid architecture previously found in Mathurā. In a record referring to Mahmud’s seventh excursion in the area in 1017, Al ‘UtbI reports Mahmud’s admiration for the beauty of the Mathurā fort, its central temple and wealth. 7  Most of the treasures in Mathurā were looted during raids by Mahmud, including numerous silver and gold deities. Similarly, in the late fifteenth century Sultan Sikander Lodi also plundered the city, resulting in the destruction of temples and shrines. 8  Indeed, it is only in the beginning of the sixteenth century that Mathurā emerges as a place of pilgrimage for Kṛṣṇa, consisting of temples related to various Vaiṣṇava sects. Therefore, local traditions and Vaiṣṇava sectarian texts suggest that the pilgrimage places of Kṛṣṇa were all but lost before renowned Vaiṣṇava reformers like Caitanya and Vallabha arrived in Vṛndāvana who each have their respective narratives within their traditions of how they initiated the rediscovery of Vṛndāvana. 9  

The rebuilding and transformation of Vṛndāvana from an apparent jungle and its establishment as a place of pilgrimage centred around Kṛṣṇa was not only due to the tireless efforts of the Vaiṣṇavas who travelled and settled in Vṛndāvana but also due to the significant political manoeuvrings and partnerships arising at the time. In particular, the celebrated Kachvāhā dynasty and its alliance with the Mughal Empire played a crucial role in the dramatic developments witnessed in Vṛndāvana. After the demise of the Delhi Sultanate with Ibrahmi Lodi’s defeat by Babur in 1526, the Mughal emperors ruled India for over 300 years, concluding with the downfall and imprisonment of Bahadur Shah Zafar by the British in 1857. The Mughal regime’s alliances with the Kachvāhā Kings featured significantly in their success; this was even acknowledged by ostensibly anti-Hindu figures. For instance, a mullah, Badayuni, commended the campaign against Rana Pratap led by the Kachvāhā King Mānsingh, describing him as “a Hindu who wields the sword of Islam.” 10  During the Mughal era many other such battles were fought in partnership with the Kachvāhās. As well as having an impact on the political fortunes of the Mughals, this alliance also proved to be pivotal in determining the joys and sorrows of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition in Vṛndāvana, which will be examined in this chapter. However, before I examine the alliance between the Mughal and the Kachvāhā rulers, and the subsequent impact this had on the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava fortunes in Vṛndāvana, I will briefly describe the political transformations that manifested in North India prior to the arrival of the Mughal ruler Akbar. Thus, this chapter will provide us with the historical context for the specific developments that emerge in the eighteenth century in the realm of politics and religion in Northern India.

### The Delhi Sultanate

Prior to the Mughal Empire, the Sultanate 11  endured for over three centuries under the helm of five major dynasties, signalling the end of the ruling regional Hindu kingdoms in Northern India. The dominion and influence of the Sultanate would penetrate ever deeper into the Indian subcontinent under the direction of these five dynasties. However, it was not until the downfall of the Delhi Sultanate and the emergence of the Mughal Empire that most of India would eventually submit to a single ruler. The first of the five Sultanate dynasties was the pioneering Mamluk dynasty, founded by a slave of Muhammad of Ghor, 12  Qutbal-Din Aybeg. 13  The Mamluk dynasty would be succeeded in 1290 by the Khilji dynasty that resisted numerous Mongol invasions in India. 14  However, the Tughlaq dynasty assumed power only 30 years later, and ruthlessly extended its dominance into much of the southern regions of the Indian subcontinent. 15  In 1398 the relentless attacks of the Central Asian conqueror Timur left the Sultanate in dismay; consequently, the leadership was swiftly taken up by the Sayyids. However, the Sayyid dynasty due to frail governance was not destined to rule for long and by 1451 Bahlul Khan Lodi of the Pashtun dynasty assumed control of the Delhi Sultanate. 16  The Lodi dynasty recovered the prestige of the Delhi Sultanate and retained control for longer than its predecessor but was nevertheless overthrown by the superior strategic manoeuvres of Babur, the first Mughal emperor, whose forces broke the extensive armies of the Lodi dynasty in the Battle of Panipat in 1526 and killed the then Sultan Ibrahim Lodi. 17  Babur, however, did not intend to follow in the footsteps of the previous Delhi Sultans and instead formulated a much more ambitious plan that exceeded the achievements of the Delhi Sultanate and eventually achieved what the Sultanate never did; political dominion throughout India. The downfall of the Lodi dynasty in the early sixteenth century therefore heralded the conclusion of the Delhi Sultanate and the rise of a vastly more expansive force in the history of Indian politics, the Mughal Empire.

The story of the first Mughal ruler, Babur, begins in Central Asia. He is thought to have descended from Genghis Khan as well as Timur, two renowned Mongol world conquerors. 18  His victory in the Battle of Panipat rewarded Babur with the beginnings of an empire, achieving authority over the cities of Delhi and Agra. Following his victory against the Lodi dynasty, the last of the Delhi Sultanates, utilising similar strategies he succeeded in thwarting the subsequent challenge from the Rājputs in the Battle of Khanua in 1527. 19  In the succeeding years Babur successfully extended his territory across most of North India. However, despite Babur’s successes and conquests, his control over Northern India remained fragile and in 1530 after governing the territory he had assimilated for only four years, he died. Babur’s son Humayun strove to preserve control over his father’s territories; however, in 1540 he was forced out of India by Afghan Suri ruler Sher Shah Sur. With Persian help, Humayun managed to recapture Lahore and Delhi in 1555 but died shortly thereafter having fallen from the steep steps of his library. 20  Thus, the scene is set for the introduction of his young son Akbar, who at the tender age of 12 took charge of the realm. His reign endured for almost 50 years, from 1556 to 1605, and was characterised by the rapid expansion of the Mughal Empire into one of the largest ever in Indian history. 21  

### Historical origins of the Kachvāhā dynasty

The celebrated empire of the Mughals was not built alone, relying substantially on strategic alliances. The alliance formed with the Kachvāhā dynasty, in particular, played an imperative role in the political developments of North India. The Kachvāhās were also pivotal in supporting the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect establish their roots in Vṛndāvana, transforming the location into the headquarters for the community in North India. Before we examine the specific ways in which they impacted North India I will present a brief synopsis of their historical roots. Traditional views concerning the historical background of the Kachvāhā dynasty posit that their lineage stems from Kush, the son of Rāma, whose life is celebrated in the epic Rāmāyaṇa. The Maharanas of Mewar or Udaipur and their clansmen, the Sisodias, likewise assert ancestry from Lava, the brother of Kush. 22  The early Kachvāhās had supplanted the previous territorial nobles; consequently, their first stronghold had been Dausa, to the West of Jaipur. From there they expanded to Amer, 23  where they built a fortified base and subsequently a palace. 24  With the entrance of the Mughals into India’s history, historical records concerning the Kachvāhās evolve from oral accounts to official archives. 25  In the dawn of the Mughal era, between 1503 and 1527, the Kachvāhā ruler Pṛthvīrāja held the throne in Amer. During his reign, Pṛthvīrāja, along with other Rājputs under the leadership of Rana Sanga of Mewar, had unsuccessfully attempted to resist the first Mughal emperor, Babur, in 1527. Pṛthvīrāja died shortly after, enduring for only a further six months. He left behind 18 sons and 3 daughters by his 9 queens. Upon his death, his eldest son Puranmal, born from his queen Tanwar, succeeded him and ruled between 1527 and 1534. In contrast to his father, Puranmal opted to align with the Mughals; indeed, he died while aiding the Mughal emperor Humayun in his efforts to recapture the stronghold of Bayana, in the Battle of Mandrail. Since his young son Sujamal, the natural heir, was considered ineligible as he was an adolescent at the time, Puranmal’s younger stepbrother Bhimsingh instead ruled from 1534 to 1537. After this period, Bhimsingh was succeeded by his eldest son Ratansingh from 1537 to 1548. However, Ratansingh was ruthlessly murdered by his stepbrother Askaran, who proclaimed himself King. In response, the court of Amer united to overthrow him and subsequently in June 1548, Bhārmal, the fourth son of Pṛthvīrāja, became the monarch of Amer. 26  Upon Bhārmal’s ascension to the throne of Amer, the Mughals, led by Humayun, had not firmly established themselves in India, encountering strong resistance from rulers such as Bahadur Shah of Gujarat and Sher Shah Suri, who became key adversaries. During this precarious situation, Bhārmal would form a decisive alliance with the Mughals which would prove to be crucial to his survival later. Thus, the Kachvāhās became the first significant Rājput allies of the Mughals. But it is worth recalling that prior to Bhārmal it was actually Puranmal who was the first to develop a rapport with the Mughal clan, and therefore Bhārmal’s policy of befriending the Mughals was a continuation and progression of an earlier diplomatic position adopted towards the Mughals. During Bhārmal’s reign, a critical episode occurred in 1556, when he came to the aid of Majnun Khan Qaqshal, a Mughal commandant, who was in a dangerous predicament caused by Haji Khan, a former servant of Sher Shah. Bhārmal organised safe passage for the Mughal commander to reach Akbar’s court in Delhi. Once he reached Akbar safely, Majnun Khan described to Akbar the loyalty and bravery of Bhārmal. Akbar was impressed, and subsequently invited Bhārmal to the court of Delhi and rewarded him. Some six years later this act would prove to be vital for the survival of Bhārmal as the presiding Kachvāhā ruler. 27  

As stated earlier, Suja, the son of the former Kachvāhā ruler Puranmal, was denied the throne because he was considered too young; however, as he grew older he sought the help of Mirza Muhammad Sharfuddin Hussain, Akbar’s governor of Mewat, to recover the throne of Amer. Consequently, Bhārmal was forced to abandon Amer as Mirza Muhammad Sharfuddin Hussain laid siege to Amer with a large army. To pacify Mirza Sharfuddin, Bhārmal handed over his own son and nephews to act as a goodwill gesture until he was able to offer a suitable tribute. 28  However, Mizra Sharafuddin was dissatisfied with Bhārmal’s offer and prepared to invade Amer once again with a greater force. In these dire circumstances Bhārmal met Chaghtai Khan, a court member of Akbar’s administration, who pleaded on his behalf with Akbar. Considering the earlier favourable rapport between Bhārmal and Akbar, Akbar offered aid to Bhārmal and summoned him to his court, which led to their subsequent meeting in 1562. During this meeting, the alliance between the Kachvāhās and the Mughals was formalised. In honour of this relationship Bhārmal offered his eldest daughter Hira Kunwari in marriage to Akbar. Akbar also commanded Mirza Sharafuddin to surrender Bhārmal’s son and nephews for safe return. 29  As a result of this union, Bhārmal’s family was engaged in Akbar’s direct service; Bhārmal’s son and grandson, Mānsingh and Bhagavāndāsa, respectively, were enrolled in the army of Akbar, and so began a long and fruitful alliance for both parties. Subsequently, Mānsingh became one of Akbar’s chief partners, leading to the rapid expansion of the Mughal Empire.

### Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava pioneers arrive in Vṛndāvana

During this period of political transformation, two former ministers of the Bengal Sultanate who had since become captivated by the missionary activities of Caitanya arrived in Vṛndāvana. There they became the recognised leaders of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect, pioneering the efforts of the community. The Husain Shahi dynasty held its reign over Bengal for approximately half a century, beginning with the demise of Abyssinian rule in Bengal, which witnessed its last “wazir” or prime minister, Syed Husain Sharif Makki \(more commonly known as Husain Shah\), rise to the throne to become the Sultan of Bengal in 1494. Although Husain Shah strove to extradite the remnants of the ousted Abyssinian regime and acquired a reputation as an aggressive ruler, 30  he nevertheless recognised the need to govern diplomatically to prolong his reign and build his new regime. To this end, he surrounded himself with an expert council who supported his objectives through intelligent strategic advice and thus occupied significant posts within his administration. It is intriguing to consider that two figures that held key positions within the regime of King Husain Shah were originally members of the *brahmin* community. Consequently, these brothers were allegedly ostracised from the *brahmin* community due to their intimate affiliation with the Muslim regime. The brothers were highly educated and wielded consummate expertise in statecraft; therefore, they were charged with respectable and highly responsible posts within the Sultan’s regime, that of the prime minister and the chief secretary. Within Husain Shah’s regime, they were known as Sarkar Malik 31  and Dabir Khas, 32  titles reflecting their posts of honour. 33  The title “Dabir” was reserved for the personal or chief secretary of the Sultan himself. The Dabir operated within the department of correspondence under the Sultan, known as the “Diwan-i-Insha,” often supported by a team of subordinate Dabirs. It was an integral role within the central secretariat and could only be held by a particularly trusted and skilled statesman, being privy to the confidential deliberations of the King. The role of Dabir involved state correspondence, diplomacy and entailed regular communication with governors, tributaries and foreign dignitaries. 34  The title “Sarkar Malik” seems to indicate an occupation comparable to the role of the prime minister, an executive responsibility immediately under the presidential rule of the Sultan. Both these roles were critical components within the administrative machinery core of the Sultanate. It is also described that their younger brother, Anupama, was the superintendent of the state’s mint facility or coin production. 35  It can be inferred that these brothers were an irreplaceable resource for the Sultan. Indeed, on the cusp of Sanātana’s explosive departure from the administration, Sultan Husain Shah expresses his dependence on Sanātana for the functioning of his government and arrests him out of fear of him leaving, having already witnessed Rūpa resign from his position. In this episode described in the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, an important biography on Caitanya, Husain Shah conveys the intimate relationship they shared, by claiming they were indeed like brothers. 36  Nevertheless, both Rūpa and Sanātana in due course would free themselves from their responsibilities within the Sultan’s regime. Upon leaving their roles in the Bengal Sultanate administration, they would meet with Caitanya and become inspired and enamoured by his activities. After receiving instructions from Caitanya, they would eventually arrive and settle in Vṛndāvana, pioneering the community’s efforts there.

In Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava history these two brothers are glorified in biographies such as *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*  37  as having laid the literary foundations of the tradition following the departure of Caitanya and expounding for the benefit of all future generations of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas the principal tenets and teachings of Caitanya. It is also they who are credited primarily for the establishment of pilgrimage sites in Vṛndāvana. Given their acclaimed contributions to the missionary activities of Caitanya, it would appear uncharacteristic of them to have been so intimately connected with the political regime in Bengal at the time. In fact, their early history attests to their very traditional *brahminical* upbringing, and their political domicile within the Sultan’s administration does pose a conundrum. According to accounts, they were descendants of a lineage of great *brahmin* Kings of Karnataka. 38  However, due to a family dispute several generations prior, the kingdom was usurped from their forefathers, leading to their great-grandfather’s relocation to Bengal. Their father, Kumaradeva, would eventually move to East Bengal, where he would father three sons, later to be known as Sanātana, Rūpa and Anupama. 39  Anupama would father a son, Jīva, who would later join the ranks of his uncles to assist in enunciating the theological doctrines of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism after the departure of Caitanya. In their youth, the three brothers received an exceptional education, and consequently the fame of their erudition and scholarship appears to have attracted the attention of the Sultan Husain Shah, who was keen to populate his ministerial posts with well-qualified and trustworthy subjects. Although it was not unheard of for respectable Hindu citizens to take up employment under the Sultan, 40  later traditional accounts seem to suggest that they were forced into employment out of fear of retribution if they were to refuse. 41  Following this arrangement and their subsequent employment within the court of Husain Shah, the brothers relocated nearer the capital in Rāmakeli, setting the scene for their eventual meeting with Caitanya. Regardless of the exact circumstances surrounding their employment, Sanātana and Rūpa, along with their younger brother Anupama, accepted prominent ministerial posts within Husain Shah’s government, and were rewarded handsomely for their service to the King.

Considering the direction eventually taken by the brothers and the upheaval their eventual actions caused in the court of the King, it is worthwhile examining their behaviours and practices during their employment, prior to their dramatic departures. While some attest to their excommunication from the *brahmin* community, evidence suggests that they maintained a respectable *brahminical* lifestyle in their residence in Rāmakeli. For instance, it is known that scholars and *brahmin*s would visit the brothers regularly, and indeed many migrated from their distant homelands to reside nearby to Sanātana and Rūpa. 42  Furthermore, it appears that while at Rāmakeli they pursued further education in the devotional arts and scriptures under Vidyāvācaspati, the brother of the famous *Advaitin* scholar convert of Caitanya known as Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. 43  Indeed, their loyalties to the *bhakti* traditions were often praised, and it is said that they cultivated strong devotional practices in the worship of Kṛṣṇa from childhood and maintained such practices even while at Rāmakeli. It also appears that the brothers used the wealth they obtained from their service to the King to sustain local *brahmins.*  44  Other strong evidence of their affiliation to the *bhakti* cult includes the *Hamsaduṭṭa*, 45  a poem by Rūpa which explores and extolls the unique spirit of the land of Vṛndāvana, the home of Kṛṣṇa. It is interesting to note here that in spite of their dedication to the Vaiṣṇava cult and the *brahmin* community, the brothers remained securely within the employment of the Muslim regime and honoured the protocols appropriate to their posts. Therefore, considering their vast and extensive experience with political power coupled with their illustrious devotion and scholarship, they were natural candidates to initiate the development of Vṛndāvana for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community, which was located in proximity to the apex of Mughal power.

## Akbar’s reign \(1556–1605\) 

### Akbar’s alliance with the Kachvāhās

Of all the Mughal emperors, the most successful is often acclaimed to have been Akbar, who ruled from 1556 to 1605. During his reign, the Mughal Empire expanded and became the most powerful political force in the Indian subcontinent. Several strategies proved to be crucial to this new-found success, which included the establishment of robust alliances with Rājput Kings. However, it has been suggested that this specific strategy was instigated earlier by his father, Humayun. According to the *Zakhirat-ul-Khawanin*, which was written by Shaikh Fakhruddin Bhakkari during the mid-seventeenth century, Humayun was probed for the reasons for which the Mughals had encountered failure in expanding their territory in India. In response, Humayun described the absence of a vibrant positive alliance with the Rājputs as one of the key impediments. He further describes that in comparison, the Rājputs and the Afghans, who had thwarted the Mughal efforts, sustained a strong pact with each other. Therefore, he stressed that if the Mughals were to progress and expand their sovereignty in North India, an alliance with the Rājputs was crucial. 46  Consequently, Akbar took this observation from his father to heart and ventured away from the protocols established in their earlier dealings with the Hindu polities. Instead, Akbar enticed them to become enthusiastic participants of the regime, defending and expanding the empire and subsequently becoming co-benefactors from its successes. Subsequently, they were given comparable rights and responsibilities as the Muslim nobles and became an integral part of the Mughal machinery. Of all the Rājputs, the Kachvāhā dynasty especially fared well, with the likes of Mānsingh elevated to principal positions within the Mughal regime. 47  

Although initiated earlier, the alliance with the Mughals moves significantly beyond superficial relations with the appointment of the Kachvāhā ruler Rāja Bhārmal of Amer, who submitted to the sovereign ruler Akbar. Following this submission an alliance was formed and in return the Kachvāhā Kings were permitted to continue to rule their ancestral lands. However, in exchange, they were also expected to provide soldiers when required, and were to pay regular tribute, acknowledging the overarching sovereignty of the Mughal Empire. To seal this alliance with Akbar, Rāja Bhārmal also arranged for his daughter to be married to Akbar. Marriage was one of numerous ways that this pact was made official. Marriage was often used as a currency of politics, safeguarding alliances, whether between Rājputs or in this case between the Mughals and the Kachvāhās. Indeed, the giving of Hindu princesses in marriage to Muslim rulers had been done long before the union of Akbar and Bhārmal’s daughter. Ensuring allegiances with other political entities was crucial for expansion. It was no doubt felt that a personal bond was the highest assurance of political fidelity. In such politically orientated marriages, the bride was generally thought to be lost to her father’s family; in this case, however, it has been claimed that Akbar’s marriage led to a unification of families, which fostered a level of respect that enabled Bhārmal’s family to hold their heads high in pride in the court of Akbar. Although the Rājput princesses that entered the Mughal family embraced a Mughal lifestyle, including the adoption of Islam, there was nevertheless a heightened level of respect, which led to an unprecedented level of trust and collaboration, particularly in light of the fact that the new generation of Mughal princes retained a combination of Rājput and Mughal traits. 48  This strategically unifying marriage led to the birth of the future emperor, Salim or, as known by his imperial title, Jahangir. On this occasion, Akbar rejoiced, particularly considering that formerly some of his offspring had perished. Thus, Salim’s birth filled him with a profound sense of gratitude. Consequently, the birth of Salim brought Bhārmal’s family even closer to Akbar. 49   

As a testament to this robust alliance, the Kachvāhās were entrusted with protecting and enhancing the Mughal Empire in vital regions of their domain; their contribution to the Mughal cause was significant and considerable. For instance, in 1572, in Akbar’s absence on the eve of a possible offensive in Agra from Ibrahmi Hussain Mirza, Rāja Bhārmal, along with Abdulah Sultanpuri, was assigned to protect Agra. This assignment symptomised the mounting trust that the Mughal ruler held for the Kachvāhā clan. However, as the rising Mughal kingdom grew in power and scope, it also encountered resistance from some of the region’s native Rājput rulers, such as Rana Udai Singh and his son Pratap Singh of Mewar, who were alarmed by the Mughal incursions into their territories. The Kachvāhā rulers seemed to regard Mughal presence as an opportunity, whereas others perhaps perceived their presence as a challenge to their respective sovereignties. After 1563, Mewar remained the only large independent Rājput state. Akbar regarded this as a major lingering impediment to ruling and unifying his empire. On behalf of Akbar, the Kachvāhā Kings had petitioned Pratap Singh of Mewar, the son of Udai Singh, to submit to the emperor. Mānsingh had visited Mewar and was later followed by his father, Bhagavandāsa. Even Rāja Todar Mal, another of Akbar’s key courtiers, had attempted to enrol Pratap Singh into the service of the Mughal Empire. However, Pratap Singh’s continual pledges to submit to Akbar were discovered to be a farce. Thus, in 1576 Akbar assigned Mānsingh to lead an army to Mewar to force Pratap Singh to submit to the empire. A historic battle ensued in 1576 which led to the downfall of Pratap Singh. 50  Mānsingh was commended for his efforts in subduing the independent Rājput prince, Pratap Singh, fulfilling the aspirations of the Mughal master Akbar to extend the reach of his empire.

During Akbar’s rule, the Kachvāhās were also considered the primary protectors and wardens of the north-western frontier. 51  In this regard, the year 1581 was a difficult and challenging time during Akbar’s reign. Not only was a plot being hatched to overthrow him, but his officers in Bengal and Bihar were also revolting against him. Furthermore, his brother Mirza Muhammad Hakim, the ruler of Kabul, was also plotting to usurp his position as the Mughal sovereign. In response to these challenges, Mughal noble Aziz Koka was sent to the east, with Todar Mal to assist him. Akbar himself marched to Lahore, forcing Mirza Muhammad Hakim to retreat, who had had till then been valiantly resisted by Saeed Khan and Bhagavandāsa. Akbar now decided to personally travel to Kabul and delegated Mānsingh to lead an army. From Abul Fazl’s account, Mānsingh was escorted by a large Rājput force which included Rai Rai Singh, Rai Durga, Askaran and others. After a fruitful campaign against Mizra Hakim, led effectively by the Rājputs, Akbar returned Kabul to Mirza Hakim, albeit now firmly within the jurisdiction of Akbar’s governance. He rewarded the faithful Kachvāhās by appointing Bhagavāndāsa the governor of Lahore jointly with Saeed Khan and appointed Mānsingh the chief of the Indus region. Later with Saeed Khan’s transfer to Delhi, Bhagavāndāsa remained the sole governor of Lahore. 52  Close ties between the Kachvāhās and Akbar were also demonstrated in the Battle of Samel, where both Bhagavāndāsa and Mānsingh exhibited great courage. The brother of Bhagavāndāsa, Bhupat, was killed in the battle. To help alleviate the family’s sorrow, Akbar against convention granted permission to his wife, the daughter of Rāja Bhārmal, to go to Amer for mourning. Eventually, in revenge, Akbar himself murdered Shah Madad, the foster brother of Muhammad Hussain Mirza who had been responsible for the death of Bhupat. 53  

The Kachvāhās were constant allies of Akbar during his reign. They protected the north-western frontier so well that for the next four years Akbar was relieved of concern for that region of his empire and left free to subdue Bihar, Bengal, Gujarat and the Deccan. Furthermore, when additional threats were presented before the Mughals, the Kachvāhās were at hand to protect the Mughal Empire. Bhagavāndāsa assisted in the conquest of Kashmir. Mānsingh led campaigns against the Yusufzai clans of Afghan with Todar Mal and played a principal role in fulfilling the ambitions of the regime in Bengal, Bihar, Orissa and Deccan. 54  Appropriate to their efforts, Bhārmal’s son Bhagavāndāsa and grandson Mānsingh were rewarded with influential positions in the Mughal courts. Thus, the families grew ever closer, and Mānsingh became one of Akbar’s closest companions. The development of the numerical *mansabdari* ranking system illustrates the fortunes of the Kachvāhā clan during the reign of Akbar. The *mansabdari* system was a key component of the administrative system introduced by Akbar. The Persian term “*mansab*” denotes rank determining the positions and salaries of a governmental official. The *mansabdars* formed the ruling officers in the Mughal Empire. The ruling class were given a specific numeric rank, those who held a rank above 1000 would be considered an *amir* \(noble\). 55  Amongst the Rājputs, the Kachvāhās had the highest ranks. Akbar’s intimate relationship with the family, coupled with the remarkable achievements of Mānsingh across the empire, reflected the unprecedented rankings attained. Indeed, by the end of Akbar’s reign in 1605, Mānsingh had attained an extraordinary ranking of 7000. 56  Mānsingh was a brilliant general and administrator; his innate ability and royal allegiance allowed him to advance to an exceptional rank. Consequently, Mānsingh was awarded the highest *mansab* possible for a court member other than a Mughal Prince. 57  Akbar and Mānsingh maintained an intimate relationship, so much so that Mānsingh was designated his son, *farzand*, even though Mānsingh was only 8 years younger than him. 58  Akbar also conferred upon Mānsingh the highest title possible by declaring him *Mirza Rājah*. The word *Mirza* is an abbreviation for the Persian epithet *amir-zadah*, meaning “born of a King.” Thus Akbar openly declared to the world that Mānsingh was no less than his very own offspring, a Mughal prince of royal status, even though a Rājput by birth. 59  

Of the Rājputs, it wasn’t only the Kachvāhās that formed intimate relations with Akbar. Other Rājputs were also highly valued and became significant members of the Mughal administration, such as Rai Sal Darbari of Shekhawati, Todar Mal, Rai Patr Dāsa and so on. During Akbar’s rule, the Rājputs were entrusted not only with their ancestral lands but also employed by Akbar outside Rājasthan, and thus they became intimate and trusted aides of the Mughal emperor. 60  They took significant positions in the empire, governing in places far and wide, such as Kashmir, Bihar, Bengal, Rājasthan, Gujarata and Orissa. During his reign Akbar’s Rājput policy had fully matured, and the coalition with the Rājputs had become stable and pervaded his entire empire. Amongst the Rājputs, the Kachvāhās held the highest positions in the imperial administrative system. Their relations with the Mughals evolved and blossomed, transcending political ties to becoming intimate comrades in the Mughal Empire.

### Akbar and Kachvāhā patronage of Vṛndāvana

As relations between Akbar and the Kachvāhās flourished, so too did patronage of the temples that were of Kachvāhā interest. The first substantial developments in Vṛndāvana for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect occur in the early stages of the Mughal–Kachvāhā coalition. Political stability and political patronage remained crucial for the survival and growth of temples, and consequently due to the generosity of the Kachvāhās, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples and community in Vṛndāvana benefited tremendously.

Hindu piety illustrated by patronage remained a core feature of a Hindu King. This trait was exhibited by the Kachvāhās, who made substantial contributions to the development of Vṛndāvana generally. For instance, Bhārmal’s predecessor, Ratan Singh \(1537–1548\), had a “ten pillared palace” built in Mathurā at Viśrāma Ghāṭa. Bhagavāndāsa also erected a tower beside the Yamuna to commemorate his mother’s *satī* and is also credited with the construction of the temple of Harideva at Govardhana. 61  However, of all the sects, the Kachvāhās were especially drawn to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples in Vṛndāvana, perceiving them as akin to symbols of Kachvāhā prestige. Consequently, key Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples such as the Govindadeva and the Madana-Mohana temples received regular direct patronage from the clan. 62  Indeed, from the very beginnings of the Kachvāhā dynasty, since the reign of Rāja Bhārmal in 1565, they had supported these Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples, as evidenced by the imperial grants assigned to the Govindadeva and the Madana-Mohana temples. During his reign, Bhārmal recommended 200 *bighās* of land to be gifted to Gopal Dāsa, who received this grant as the chief priest of the Govindadeva and Madana-Mohana temples. This generosity was a testament to the early Kachvāhā dedication to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples. 63  

The Kachvāhā dynasty was also responsible for one of the largest temples in all of India during the reign of Akbar. The temple was approximately 80 meters in length, taking almost 14 years to construct. This temple became home to the Govindadeva deity. Earlier, the celebrated Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava saint Rūpa Gosvāmī had constructed the first home for Govindadeva. Subsequently, a second temple was built under the supervision of Mānsingh. Due to his prominent political position, Mānsingh drew on Mughal resources to construct the Govindadeva temple. The foundation of this new temple was made from red sandstone quarried from Tantapura, which was also utilised for the imperial projects in Agra and Fatehpur Sikri. 64  Consequently, the Govindadeva temple resembled other Mughal constructions, principally the distinctive red sandstone feature of Mughal monuments. Other resemblances included domes enclosed with radiating petals, piercing angled vaults and an amalgamation of alternating pillars and arches. Considering the same foundations and the same constructional devices were used as those employed in the imperial projects, one presumes the same architects were also used. In other words, it is safe to assume that the same team of architects that were commissioned to create Mughal masonry at different sites in the empire were also deployed to develop the Govindadeva temple in Vṛndāvana; 65  hence, the sanctuary inevitably resembled the majestic style of a grand Mughal monument. 66  The Govindadeva temple of Vṛndāvana built by Rāja Mānsingh portrayed a blend of Mughal and Hindu traits, reflecting the alliance at an imperial level. Thus, this temple was seen as a collaboration of several entities, as described by Śrivatsa Gosvāmī, who states that the architectural design of the Govindadeva temple can be seen as a politics of embrace, reflecting Hindu, Muslim and even Buddhist features. He comments, “When a Hindu temple, decorated with Buddhist features, dances in love with an Islamic Monument, Govindadeva was born.” 67  Śrivatsa Gosvāmī also proposes that in the case of the creation of the Govindadeva temple, both Akbar and the Gosvāmīs made concessions. Akbar, who didn’t believe in the worship of images, provided land for the worship of Govindadeva and the Gosvāmīs neglected age-old traditions for constructing temples in this period. Although challenging and necessitating concessions from both parties, they both nevertheless profited from this union. 68  Therefore, despite the apparent compromises the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas had to concede, they greatly benefited from this political alliance, and as Tarapada Mukherjee notes, “Soon after the death of the six Gosvāmīs, the big temples of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect accumulated so much land and wealth that each of their custodians attained the status of a zamindar.” 69  

Vṛndāvana underwent a radical transformation and although sparsely populated became inhabited with new constructions like the Govindadeva temple within the pastoral and agricultural setting. However, as highlighted by Monika Horstmann,
>  
> This imperial involvement was not without its motivations of course, and the construction of the Govindadeva temple was seen as a combined effort by the Mughal administration and the Kachvāhā clan to gain further control over Bengal by accommodating the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, which was popular in that region. 70  

In other words, it could also be argued that the construction of temples principally served the sovereignty of the sponsor, indeed, as the monument resembled Mughal architecture since the building blocks were being provided by Akbar’s court. This certainly promoted Akbar’s authority in his empire. Furthermore, Mānsingh appears to have considered patronage in Vṛndāvana as an act that enhanced Kachvāhā prestige or a method to memorialise family members. Thus, temple inscriptions are found which describe his ancestry back to Pṛthvīrāja and it is well known that he built temples to commemorate his departed mother and son. In other words, temples were built for personal as well as political and religious reasons; hence, motivations were blurred. 71  Traditional accounts also describe that Mānsingh, prior to embarking on a critical battle on behalf of the emperor, visited Vṛndāvana and went before Govindadeva. There he declared, “I shall respectfully construct a dwelling place for King Govinda in Vṛndāvana, praised by the gods, by means of which, indeed, there should be a \[revival in\] connection with the festivals of the incarnation of Kṛṣṇa.” 72  Immediately after this declaration, construction began. Along with the construction of the temple, the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana received complete immunity from all taxes. The temple took 14 years to be constructed, beginning in 1576 and ending in 1590, with an extraordinary expenditure deployed in the process of construction. Consequently, whatever the exact motivations behind the temple, it became one of the finest examples of architectural art in Northern India.

Despite Mānsingh’s generous patronage and support of the Govindadeva temple, the nature of Mānsingh’s allegiances to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect remain obscure. It has been suggested that it was due to the influence of Raghunātha Dāsa, a prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava teacher, that the temple of Govindadeva at Vṛndāvana was constructed by Mānsingh; 73  however, it is also clear that although his commitment to Govindadeva is self-evident, there is no evidence to support that he underwent a formal initiation in the Caitanya lineage. Therefore, some have claimed that the original motive to erect the Govindadeva temple stemmed from his father, and Mānsingh’s involvement was driven by the desire to fulfil his father’s last wishes. 74  It is also well known that Mānsingh was a patron of other deities, such as Devi and Śiva. He was also responsible for the reconstruction and restoration of the Jaganātha temple in Puri. 75  He also built palaces and temples in his ancestral home, Amer. His patronage exceeded just temples and palaces; he was also known for constructing mosques in Lahore and Raj Mahal and maintained the shrine Māmū Bhānjā in Hājīpura. 76  Thus, the Govindadeva temple was just one of many structures across the empire during Akbar’s reign instigated by Mānsingh, another special feature of the alliance between the Kachvāhās and the Mughals. Kachvāhās such as Mānsingh retained a dual role; he was a leading Kachvāhā King amongst the Rājputs yet also a viceroy to Akbar. This dual role is illustrated in the engravings in the palace he built in Bihar as governor. In these engravings, there is one inscription in Persian which describes Mānsingh in respect to his position to Akbar, and another in Sanskrit where Akbar is omitted and instead Mānsingh is exclusively exalted. 77  Mānsingh’s identity as an independent Hindu King didn’t generally pose a threat to his role as a leading governor of Akbar, and the same applies to other Rājput rulers who were aligned with Akbar. Indeed, such dual roles were considered essential for the synergistic rule and expansion of the Mughal regime. Nevertheless, there were instances of tension; for example, when Mānsingh was designated to govern Bengal in 1594, during his assignment he built a city which was known initially as Rājanagar. However, Akbar preferred the city to be known as Akbarnagar for obvious reasons and under duress Mānsingh conceded. 78  This case of tension reflected the simultaneous requirement to serve the Mughal Empire and yet establish the individual promotion of the King.

There were also other Rājputs who contributed to the development of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community’s status in Vṛndāvana. For instance, another important influential courtier was Todar Mal, a Khatrī Hindu from Avadh who occupied the post of finance minister within the Mughal administration. He was a keen supporter of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school and was alleged to have been initiated by Raghunātha Bhatta Gosvāmī. 79  It is claimed that upon the request of Jīva he petitioned Akbar to supply official acknowledgement for the positions held by the custodians of the Govindadeva and Madana-Mohana temples. Subsequently, they were both officially recognised by the state under the authority of Jīva. Todar Mal also arranged land grants for these respective temples. 80  The two temples were considered partners, as they had been built by Jīva’s uncles Rūpa and Sanātana; however, this appears to change once the new Govindadeva temple was constructed by Mānsingh, becoming the far larger one of the two. In 1584 Todar Mal personally arranged a grant of 100 *bighās* of land to the temple of Madana-Mohana in Vṛndāvana. He made this grant in the name of Akbar to Gopal Dāsa, who served Jīva as a priest not only in the temple of Madana-Mohana, but also in the Govindadeva temple and was elsewhere referred to as his *vakīl* or legal representative. 81  Todar Mal has also been credited with providing resources to facilitate Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa’s aspirations to restore numerous sacred sites in Vṛndāvana that had been rediscovered. Another courtier, Raysal Darbari, an associate of Mānsingh and the chief of the Shekhawat branch of the Kachvāhās, is also described to have been instrumental for the care of the Gopīnātha temple in Vṛndāvana. 82  

A significant measure of the influence exerted by the Kachvāhā rulers and other royal courtiers such as Todar Mal upon the Mughal administration pertaining to patronage of temples in Vṛndāvana is evident from a somewhat surprising event in 1598. Akbar requested his principal aide Abul Fazl, the author of the official history of Akbar’s reign, the *Akbarnama*, to survey the Vṛndāvana area to determine what type of land endowments the temples in Vṛndāvana, Mathurā and Nandagaon, were entitled to. After consulting various *brahmins* from Mathurā, a total of 35 grants were endowed for temples, resulting in not only the consolidation of earlier commitments but also additional state-issued grants. Land endowments that had already been provided to 8 temples were extended, and a further 600 acres of land were divided amongst the remaining 27 temples. 83  Furthermore, in 1562, Akbar also lifted the tax that had been imposed on all Hindus who visited places of pilgrimage, and in 1564 he repealed the *jizya* tax, a poll tax that had been levied on non-Muslim subjects. 84  There also exists an imperial *farman* from 1581, issued upon the orders of the Queen Mother, Hamida Banu Begam, and another by ‘Abd’r Rahim Khan-I Khanan in 1588, both permitting the free grazing of the cows and oxen of Vithalrai 85  of “Govardhana.” In 1593 Akbar also issued a *farman* prohibiting the hunting and slaughtering of peacocks in the *paraganas* of Mathurā, Sahar, Mangotta and Ao. 86  In this way, the political alliance between the Mughal ruler and the Kachvāhā Kings and other courtiers such as Todar Mal had a direct impact on the fortunes of pilgrimage places in Vṛndāvana and Mathurā. These examples illustrate the significance of political support in determining the prosperity of a religious sect. 

### Jīva Gosvāmī’s gratitude for patronage

As discussed, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect in Vṛndāvana received generous patronage from the political regime; their appreciation and gratitude for the support was visible through the actions and words of Jīva, who was considered to be a leader of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect in Vṛndāvana during Akbar’s reign. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition was initiated in the early sixteenth century by its founder, Caitanya. Although he left little by the way of written work, he inspired a proliferation of literature from his followers which expanded on his teachings and drew its authority from canonical works connected to the tradition such as the *Bhāgavata Purāṇa*. Jīva was a key contributor to this explosion of writings. Indeed, Jīva was considered one of the greatest Sanskrit scholars of his era. 87  In his compositions he refers to the teachings of his uncles Rūpa and Sanātana, who were the leading composers of works that became central to the tradition post-Caitanya. Once Rūpa and Sanātana passed from this world, their nephew Jīva became the natural successor to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect in Vṛndāvana. Jīva’s uncles Rūpa and Sanātana were direct students of Caitanya, and Jīva’s father Anupama was the youngest of the three brothers. As a young child inspired by his uncles, Jīva embarked on a life of asceticism in Vṛndāvana. He also travelled to Navadvipa, where he met Nityānanda, 88  who instructed him and led him on a pilgrimage tour of sites connected to Caitanya’s early activities. Later he studied Sanskrit grammar and philosophy under Madhūsudana Vācaspati. Jīva eventually returned to Vṛndāvana by 1541 and assisted his uncles in editing books such as Rūpa’s *Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu*. Jīva also compiled numerous theological works himself that systemised Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava theology such as the *Sandarbhas*. He also imparted guidance and systematic training to another generation of influential Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas such as Śrinivāsa, Narottama and Śyāmānanda. Through their efforts the literatures that had emerged in Vṛndāvana were distributed to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava strongholds in Bengal and Orissa, becoming foundational works for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect for generations to come. 89  Jīva was also left assets by his uncles and other Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava figures in Vṛndāvana such as Raghunātha dāsa. Jīva’s contributions were multiple; he produced numerous theological texts and influenced later generations of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava leaders and subsequently the positions of other Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava strongholds. However, a contribution that is seldom discussed is the responsibility he undertook in the development of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temple estates in Vṛndāvana during the Mughal-Kachvāhā political regime. Jīva’s involvement in temple administration was extensive; he was instrumental in procuring land, nominating custodians for temples and petitioned ministers for imperial support. Jīva also purchased land in Ariṭha known later as Rādhā-kuṇḍa from as early as 1546. He also acquired land near the residence of Rūpa. In 1568, he also petitioned Todar Mal to appeal to Akbar for the Madana-Mohana and Govindadeva temples to be officially entrusted to him as they had been gifted to him by his uncles. Indeed, earlier Jīva had also received the inheritance of all the properties connected to his uncles, Rūpa and Sanātana. In 1588, he also received six plots of land in Ariṭha from Raghunātha Dāsa. 90  In 1601, he also purchased land in Vṛndāvana, acquiring 12 retreats, or *kunjas*, in Vṛndāvana. As he retired in 1606 he allocated the custodianship of the temples and effects to Vilāsadāsa and subsequently to Kṛṣṇa Dāsa. 91  All these developments can be traced in official Mughal documentation. Therefore, as well as shaping the foundational corpus of works for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect and operating as the sect leader, we must also recognise that Jīva was engrossed in guarding and expanding Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava assets in Vṛndāvana, relying substantially on the presiding political forces in his personal endeavours to direct custodianship and implement administrative protocols concerning key Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples, lands and sites. Consequently, Jīva acknowledged the support that the political regime provided and expressed his gratitude explicitly. For instance, a Sanskrit inscription known as the *Govindamandirāstakam* was compiled by him after completion of the new temple for Govindadeva by Mānsingh. This inscription consists of eight verses, which include praise directed to not only Kachvāhā King Mānsingh but also the Mughal ruler Akbar for his role in the construction of the majestic Govindadeva temple:
>  
> Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifesting a thirst to protect his own devotees, always appears situated on the yogapīṭha \[seat of Yogamāyā\] here in Vṛndā \[Devī\]’s forest \[i.e. Vṛndāvana, which is\] praised by the group of gods beginning with Śiva; \[Vṛndāvana is thus\] the major cause of frustration even in Vaikuṇṭha’s \[Viṣṇu’s own realm’s\] heart; \[in such a Vṛndāvana\] manifests what is to be known by means of the group of hundreds of scriptures śruti-smṛti though the principle of Śrī Govinda \[i.e., Govinda manifests the truth of all scriptures there\].

> When Śrīman Akbar \[sanskritised to Arkavara, “the best sun”\] naturally ruled all the world, the group of good people engaged in \[performing\] their own dharma \[proper actions\] obtained happiness in the highest degree. The virtuous Vaiṣṇavas always gave him blessings joyfully because they considered that very place \[Vṛndāvana to be\] the place of Śrī Govinda \[and therefore\] worth residing in \[and under Akbar such residence was possible\].

> In this place \[Vṛndāvana\] his \[Akbar’s\] constant companion, the King named Śrī Māna Simha, having men \[i.e., a leader of troops\], a moon \[that causes swelling\] of the milk ocean \[that is\] the glory of Pṛthvīrājas shining lineage, the son of Bhagavanadāsa, born of the King Bhārahamalla \(=Bhāramala\), making the temple from his power \[i.e., by his own strength\], must ever partake of joy with stable Lakṣmi \[prosperity; the proverbially fickle goddess of fortune\].

> Then Śrīman Arkavara, that piercing King of Kings, marched to the enemy countries; the conqueror busies himself roving about and \[making\] ruin. Who on this earth does not know of that very lion among men \[Śrī Mānavasimha, i.e. Mana Simha\]? Kings going to battle with him, falling down \[defeated, go\] to heaven marked with signs of glory \[or, they become the signs of his glory in heaven\]. 

> The victorious King, Śrī Māna Simha, is one \[born in\] the royal Kaccha\[vāha\] lineage. His best man, the intelligent Śrī Kalyāṇadāsa, who takes shelter at the lotus feet of Śrī Govinda, must always be victorious. Joyfully creating that \[or his, Govinda’s\] temple speedily, he zealously brought the work to completion.

> Śrī Haridāsa, the foremost leader of those serving the lotus feet of Śrī Govinda, granting love to them \[those serving Govinda\], by means of whom, from the beginning, this temple, \[is\] increasing in the joy \[rāsa, sweetness\] of service, by whom the King, Śrī Māna Simha, duly obtained incredible bliss, must always rejoice.

> Among the architects resident at Dillī \[Indraprastha\] is the venerable \[one\] named Govindadāsa, sheltered by Śrī Māna Simha; he built this beautiful temple here. The cause of happiness and prosperity to the respectable Vaiṣṇavas now and in the future, he must ever be made a receptacle of Hari’s own compassion.

> In the work here, who \[is\] the eminent Bhagavān and who is the expert Ugrasena? The two of them, dispatched by the King Śrī Māna Simha, must rejoice. Which other one is to be singled out? Or who is better \[and who\] is less? He \[i.e. each\] gave help to the other step by step; both must gain the highest joy.

> The temple’s creations \[was\] in the \[samvat\] year called Muni\(7\), Veda\(4\), Rtu\(6\), Candra\(1\), \[i.e. V.S. 1647/AD 1590\]. May Śrī Govinda be pleased by the praise of this \[i.e. his temple\] in verses.

> This soul \[Jīva i.e. Jīva Gosvāmī\] must honour the two named Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana, the performers of service to the master of Śrī Vṛndāvana that was discontinued \[because of\] the Kali \[age\]. The end of Śrī Govindamandirāṣṭakam \[eight verses praising Govinda’s temple\] written by Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. In the year \(V.S.\) 1727 on the twelfth day of the bright fortnight of Bhādra, Vaiṣṇavadāsa wrote it down in Kāmyavana. 92  

In this inscription, both Akbar and Mānsingh are extensively glorified, illustrating the favourable political environment that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community operated in during this era. Akbar is described by Jīva as a ruler that facilitated the free practice of Vṛndāvana *bhakti*, and Mānsingh, his close aide, is given credit for the fortune received in the form of the new Govindadeva temple. From this inscription, we also learn that Mānsingh engaged architects from Delhi, utilising imperial resources to build the grand temple, which provides further evidence of the robust Kachvāhā–Mughal alliance. Jīva closes by offering respects to his uncles, Rūpa and Sanātana, presenting himself as a follower of them. This inscription embodies the indebtedness that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school, led by Jīva, held for the political regime that facilitated the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect’s aspirations within Vṛndāvana.

Such praises for Akbar from Hindu sects seem to be have been popular in this era; at times he was even likened to an avatar of Rāma. The royal courts even issued a translation of the Rāmāyana into Persian and the epic saga was also illustrated in Akbar’s atelier. 93  Akbar’s passion for inter-religious discourse was also well known, exhibited by the erection of the “House of Worship” or “Ibadat Khana” where Akbar orchestrated debates and discussions between scholars from an assortment of traditions. Even Akbar’s personal religious disposition indicates a broad interest in a variety of religions. It has been claimed that after being apparently disillusioned with Islam, he adopted and configured an enigmatic practice known as Divine Religion, or *Din-I Ilahi*, during his reign. Although the exact nature of this ideology has been a matter of debates, it has often been considered an amalgamation of Islamic and Hindu creeds. 94  

Akbar’s accommodation of religious practices within his domain extended beyond merely the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school. Akbar’s ecumenical approach towards the conglomerate of religions in his domain has been presumed to have been unprecedented; however, it has also been claimed that it was rather an extension of the policy established by his predecessors, such as Timur. In other words, he imitated a model of sacred authority displayed earlier in locations like Iran and Central Asia, which necessitated the King to adopt an impartial stance, transcending sectarian divisions, facilitating a proto secularism in his domain. 95  Therefore, whatever the rulers’ personal religious attitudes and distinctive partialities, they were expected to administer to the diverse audience that they governed. Consequently, Azfar Moin has suggested Akbar’s stance must also be considered against the backdrop of sacred kingship that had been embodied earlier. Thus, this suggests that Akbar’s accommodation and recognition of numerous religions was not necessarily only the culmination of his religious pursuits or even necessarily solely a political manoeuvre to inspire his diverse nobility or a mechanism adopted to merely claim the numerous religious denominations that occupied his territory but rather possibly also an attempt to replicate traditional forms of kingship. 96  

In the sixteenth century Vṛndāvana experiences a remarkable transformation, instigated by Vaiṣṇava reformers who had settled there. The political powerhouses of this era played a vital role in the reestablishment of sites in relation to Kṛṣṇa. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect thrived due to their bond with Kachvāhā rulers such as Mānsingh. The Kachvāhā Kings were prominent participants of Akbar’s administration and entrusted with numerous responsibilities. Their political standing granted them resources to pursue their religious ambitions. Akbar’s position as an impartial monarch with deep interests in syncretic creeds also enabled generous patronage that tremendously benefited sects such as the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, exemplified by the construction of the splendid temple of Govindadeva in Vṛndāvana which appeared to be the chief product of the Mughal–Kachvāhā–Gauḍīya coalition.

## Jahangir’s reign \(1605–1627\) 

### From Akbar to Jahangir

Following the death of Akbar, Jahangir, the eldest son and natural heir to Akbar, assumed the Mughal throne, ruling the vast empire that Akbar had carved. Earlier in his life he was known as Muhammad Sultan Salim; however, later he was more commonly known according to his imperial name, Jahangir, that person who is the seizer of the world. His rise to power was far from smooth; in 1600 due to his zest for power he initiated a rebellion against his own father. Subsequently, he established his own court, issued coins in his own name and embraced imperial epithets. Nevertheless, his efforts to overthrow Akbar were futile, although he did successfully execute the assassination of Akbar’s principal aide, Abul Fazl. Eventually in 1604, due to the intervention of Jahangir’s stepmothers and grandmother, both father and son were reunited and upon his death Akbar designated his son Salim as his preferred successor. 97  

In general, despite rarely embarking on battles, Jahangir’s reign as Mughal emperor was marked by its political stability. He was able to consolidate the impressive empire that Akbar had built, the empire’s economy steadily grew and there were numerous cultural contributions born from his passion for art. The greatest threat to his sovereignty stemmed from rebellions initiated by his sons. Indeed, within the first year of his reign, his eldest son Khusrau plotted a rebellion; however, the revolt was short-lived and Khusrau was imprisoned and blinded. However, a more severe judgement was imparted to his 2,000 accomplices, who were executed for their parts in the uprising. Towards the end of his reign Jahangir faced another rebellion; on this occasion it was from his son Khurram, who would later become Mughal ruler Shah Jahan. The rebellion stemmed from Jahangir’s mounting affection for his wife Nur Jahan; as a result his son Khurram, fearing he would be deprived of the throne as rightful heir, rebelled in 1622. The rebellion destabilised the empire in the concluding years of his rule. 98  

### Jahangir’s alliance with the Kachvāhās 

Jahangir’s alliance with the Kachvāhās commenced during the reign of his father, Akbar. In 1584 he was ceremoniously married to Man Bai, the daughter of Bhagavāndāsa, whose father was the Kachvāhā ruler Bhārmal, as part of Akbar’s strategy for fortifying political alliances with the Kachvāhās. The marriage ceremony featured both Hindu and Muslim rites, reflecting the unification of the two dynasties. This marriage alliance strengthened the position of the Kachvāhā clan at the Mughal court. Salim was also married to other daughters of Rājput ruling houses. This arrangement of marriages reflected Akbar’s aspiration to preserve the union of Mughal-Rājput alliances to his expected successor to the throne, Prince Salim. Salim’s family therefore featured Rājputs who inevitably influenced him from an early age.

Once Jahangir succeeded Akbar, the Rājputs continued to fare well for other reasons. For instance, Rāja Vīrsingh Deva, who had earlier killed Abul Fazl, Akbar’s personal aide, upon Jahangir’s request, was rewarded. Despite being Akbar’s sworn enemy, the Bundelā Rājput, Vīrsingh Deva, attained Jahangir’s favour, being awarded the title *mahārāja*. He was granted ample imperial resources in his service to Jahangir as evidenced by his lavish expenditures on architectural projects. This was especially reflected in his domain, Orcchā, where Rāja Vīrsingh Deva constructed a grand temple, known today as Caturbhuja. In addition, the Rāja built another impressive temple in Mathurā known as the Keśavadeva temple constructed from the generous sponsorship of the Mughal regime. 99  

The Kachvāhās generally retained healthy relations with Jahangir; however, Mānsingh’s relocation to govern in Bengal has sometimes been ascribed as punishment due to doubts over his allegiance to Jahangir displayed by his support of Khusrau during the rebellion. Furthermore, Mānsingh had become so influential that after Akbar’s death, his son Jahangir’s primary concern was how to counteract the general’s influence at the court. 100  Mānsingh was later assigned to Bihar and eventually Jahangir sent him to join the efforts in the Deccan in 1608 to subdue Malik Ambar of the Ahmadnagar Sultanate. In the Deccan, Jahangir’s forces were unable to penetrate the frontier and Mānsingh eventually died while situated in the province in 1614. 101  Following Mānsingh’s death, Jahangir granted succession to his son Bhāvsingh. Bhāvsingh was gifted the title of *Mirza Rājah* and allocated the rank of 4000, which would increase to 5000 a few years later. Even though the Kachvāhās continued to fare well under the governance of the new Mughal emperor they were not able to attain the heights of influence or the positions of that achieved during Akbar’s regime. Bhāvsingh became a central member of the Mughal administration, yet he was unable to attain a status akin to his father or his grandfather. Indeed, during the reign of Jahangir, respective rulers from the Rājput state attained at most *mansabs* of 5000; therefore although the Rājputs remained a significant part of Jahangir’s court, they did not attain the stature of pre-eminence acquired during the reign of Akbar. 102  Like his father, Bhāvsingh was later sent to support the army’s efforts in the Deccan in 1619. In this endeavour, he also died and the news of Bhāvsingh’s death reached Jahangir at Hardwar in 1621, subsequently he awarded succession to his nephew Jaisingh I, honouring him with the title Rāja and a rank of 2000. In 1623 Jahangir sent Jaisingh I to the Deccan, where he joined the empire’s perpetual war with Malik Ambar. With the ascension of Jaisingh I, the Kachvāhā royal family entered a new phase of fortune and political influence within the empire. 103  Indeed, Jaisingh I’s distinguished reign entailed participation in expansion efforts across numerous fronts of the Mughal Empire. His reign as Kachvāhā ruler was extensive, commencing with Jahangir, enduring throughout Shah Jahan’s rule and spanning the first decade of Aurangzeb’s reign.

### Jahangir and Kachvāhā patronage of Vṛndāvana

Jahangir continued endorsing patronage to the temples of Vṛndāvana as dispensed by the earlier Mughal administration under Akbar’s rule. In fact, in the reign of Jahangir, the grants issued to the temples were increased and improved. Todar Mal’s previous grant of 100 *bighās* established in 1584 to the priest Gopal Dāsa of the Madana-Mohana temple was made permanent. Jahangir also added a further two temples to the original endowment list comprising 35 temple grants created by Akbar’s administration in 1598. His administration also added a *farman* in February 1612 granting 10 *bighās* to the *sevaka* of the temple Thakura Dwara at Vṛndāvana and in a *farman* issued in April 1613 they granted 15 *bighās* to the *sevaka* of Thakur Bhoja Sundara, a temple near Mathurā. 104  The regime also issued several grants to individuals in Vṛndāvana, and at times included “with sons,” which inferred that the grant should remain valid beyond the death of the named grantee, continuing to be issued to future successors of the family. 105  During Jahangir’s reign, the Kachvāhā family remained closely connected to Vṛndāvana, especially the Govindadeva temple. After the construction of the grand temple, Mānsingh committed to a daily contribution of five rupees for the maintenance of the temple. By 1608 this was raised to nine rupees, of which eight rupees were directed to maintain the temple and one rupee was assigned for the preservation of its priest, Haridāsa. 106  

Jahangir’s alliance with the Kachvāhās began at an early age, marked by his marriage to the daughter of Bhagavāndāsa during his father’s reign. Although the Kachvāhās continued to hold important positions in the Mughal court during Jahangir’s reign, they were nevertheless not able to attain the heights of influence that Bhagavāndāsa and Mānsingh had attained in the administration of Akbar. Jaisingh I became the foremost Kachvāhā King during the rule of Jahangir and his extensive reign led to a new period of fortune for the Kachvāhā clan and rejuvenated the special status of the Kachvāhās within the Mughal administration. Patronage for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples as established in the reign of Akbar continued without disruption and in specific cases was enhanced; thus the Kachvāhās continued to play a pivotal role in influencing the politics and patronage of North India.

## Shah Jahan’s reign \(1628–1658\)

### From Jahangir to Shah Jahan

In 1592 Khurram was born and named by his grandfather Akbar, who was particularly fond of this grandson. Khurram would go on to become the Mughal ruler, popularly known as Shah Jahan, “the King of the world.” He was the third son of the Mughal emperor Jahangir, emerging victorious in the power struggle that ensued immediately after Jahangir’s death. He successfully occupied the Mughal throne in 1628. In response to the contriving acts of Jahangir’s favourite wife, Nur Jahan, Shah Jahan instigated a rebellion in Jahangir’s reign with Rāja Mahal becoming his headquarters. However, after three years had lapsed Prince Khurram reconciled with his father Jahangir. Upon Jahangir’s death, Shah Jahan, with the support of the elders of the court, eliminated all rivals for the throne and was crowned Mughal emperor. 107  During his 30-year reign the Mughal Empire expanded steadily, with his sons leading large armies on various frontiers. In contrast to his father, Shah Jahan excelled in martial arts and was responsible for military successes both as a prince and as an emperor. He led successful campaigns against Rana Amar Singh of Mewar and in the Deccan frontier. Indeed, Jahangir was grateful for his efforts and in recognition of his success as a prince had awarded him the renowned title Shah Jahan. Shah Jahan also employed some of the world’s finest architects, artists and craftsmen, and channelled vast imperial resources towards Mughal architecture and monuments across his empire, the most famous of which include the new capital Shahjahanabad and the Taj Mahal at Agra, which was a tomb for his beloved wife Mumtaz Mahal. 108  

Some historians have also suggested that Shah Jahan was a devout advocate of Islamic purity. Thus, upon his ascension, he introduced policies that favoured Muslims and proved to be detrimental for non-Muslims. For instance, in 1633, six years into his rule, Shah Jahan outlawed the construction or repair of temples and also ordered the demolition of newly built Hindu temples. However, Shah Jahan’s partiality for his son Dara Shukoh, who championed the harmony between all faiths, resembling his great-grandfather Akbar, suggests other facets to Shah Jahan’s attitude towards non-Muslims within his domain. 109  

### Shah Jahan’s alliance with the Kachvāhās

Alliances with the Rājput clans prevailed during the reign of Shah Jahan. Of all the Rājput houses, the Kachvāhās continued to serve the Mughal regime loyally and therefore were rewarded for their efforts. The Kachvāhā ruler Jaisingh I ascended the throne of Amer in 1622, close to the conclusion of Jahangir’s reign. Jaisingh I’s reign ended upon his death in 1667, ten years into Aurangzeb’s rule. He was one of the foremost commanding nobles in the Mughal Empire. While as a prince in revolt against his father Jahangir, Shah Jahan stated that he had always favoured the Rājputs as key allies and he had informed Jaisingh I that he was as much a favourite with him as Mānsingh was with Akbar. Under Shah Jahan’s rule, the Rājputs attained a special position in the Mughal courts, reflected in the *mansabs* they were awarded. Rao Sur was awarded a *mansab* of 4000, Rana Jagat Singh, Rāja Gaj Singh and Rao Ratan Hada were awarded the *mansabs* of 5000 and Kachvāhā King Jaisingh I attained the highest *mansab* of 7000 along with Jaswantsingh. 110  

Jaisingh I was assigned several major tasks during the rule of Shah Jahan. In 1627, although Shah Jahan succeeded in taking control of the Mughal Empire, Khan Jahan, Jahangir’s chief commander in Deccan, revolted against Shah Jahan. Consequently, Jaisingh I was tasked with pursuing Khan Jahan till the general was killed in 1631. Soon after, Jaisingh I rejoined the Mughal mission in the Deccan till he was transferred to Afghanistan in 1638. Once there, he protected the north-western border of the empire till 1643 like his forefathers. In 1639, Jaisingh I was awarded the title of *Mizra Rāja* from Shah Jahan, the same title Mānsingh had received from Akbar. Jaisingh I was briefly reposted to the Deccan to protect the region till 1647. However, he was soon brought back to Afghanistan as King Shah Abbas II of Persia had conquered the fort of Qandahar, the frontier between Persia and Mughal Afghanistan in 1649. This was a major embarrassment for the Mughal Empire; thus Shah Jahan sent a military legion to recover the ground lost. Jaisingh I joined the Mughal campaigns for reclaiming the fort and was involved in three sieges till 1653 which ended without success. 111  During this challenging period, despite Jaisingh I’s relentless exertions during the sieges of Qandahar, his efforts went unnoticed due to a dispute with Dara Shukoh, Shah Jahan’s favoured son. Nevertheless, he would soon receive retribution, for in 1657 at the end of Shah Jahan’s reign came a turning point in the direction of the Mughal Empire, and Jaisingh I would prove to be pivotal in several feats, including the defeat of Shuja, the capturing of Dara, neutralising Jaswant and conquering Shivaji, 112  all of which were vital accomplishments for the forthcoming Mughal emperor, Aurangzeb.

### Shah Jahan and Kachvāhā patronage of Vṛndāvana

In contrast to his great-grandfather Mānsingh, Jaisingh I focused his architectural efforts within his ancestral homes; subsequently, we do not witness the construction of any temples or palaces outside Amer. Instead, he invested substantial resources in constructing a palace in Amer; however, despite it being well underway by 1637, due to Shah Jahan’s zest for architecture, the emperor had disseminated a decree stating that all works should cease on buildings as the imperial resources were required for tasks at the Mughal headquarters in Agra. Therefore, the Amer palace was finished later as reserves were redirected to the capital. 113  

The religious climate for non-Muslims during Shah Jahan’s reign is generally portrayed to have been constrained in comparison to Akbar and Jahangir’s reigns, and therefore less conducive for the Hindu populace. 114  However, despite this claim it is difficult to ascertain categorically whether Shah Jahan was a less tolerant ruler in this regard. For instance, the reinstatement of the *jizya* tax has often been cited as evidence of his intolerance; however, the tax was short-lived and quickly removed due to the petitioning of highly placed Hindu nobles. Six years into his reign, in 1633, Shah Jahan also issued a declaration that any temple which had commenced construction work in Jahangir’s reign yet had not been finished would not be sanctioned to continue, and subsequently in Kashmir, Gujarat, Allahabad, Orccha and Varanasi, temples were demolished. Some have claimed that there were several key developments around Shah Jahan that provoked such actions; his Rājput mother had died in 1619 and his intimate circle of advisors consisted of primarily orthodox *sunni* clergy. 115  However, the destruction of temples was not necessarily symbolic of his animosity towards non-Muslims. For instance, in 1635 as a response to a rebellion orchestrated by Vīrsingh’s son Jhūjharsingh, who had held a precarious relationship with Shah Jahan, the state of Orcchā was attacked. This hostility stands out in contrast to the earlier robust Mughal-Bundelā alliance established between Vīrsingh and Jahangir. The drastic decline in relations resulted in the subsequent destruction of the Orccha temple. 116  Likewise, Shah Jahan’s demolition of the restored Chitor Fort of the Rāja of Mewar has sometimes been claimed to be another example of Hindu injustice; however, it has also been alleged that this was a strategic act considering that earlier the Rāja of Mewar had been a significant adversary of the Mughals and therefore Shah Jahan was reluctant to see him reinforce his defences. The Rāja had also not acquired imperial permission for the renovations carried out. Therefore, in notable cases the destruction of specific temples or estates connected to the Hindu nobles are claimed to have been motivated by the politics of the day as opposed to expressions of religious intolerance. 117  Nevertheless, irrespective of Shah Jahan’s personal motivations, it must also be acknowledged that this period witnesses only a few notable temples being built in the empire apart from in Bengal, which was a considerable distance from the imperial capital. Indeed, the vast majority of the structures erected by the Hindu populace were non-religious, such as domestic structures, palaces and so on, largely in their ancestral homes as in the case of Jaisingh I described earlier. 118  

In regard to the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples, all the grants issued previously continued unabated; however, no further grants were issued under Shah Jahan’s rule. 119  The Mughal administration meticulously respected previously issued grants under Jahangir and Akbar; for instance, in 1633 *farmans* were issued to renew Akbar’s previous grant of 170 *bighās* to temples such as Madana-Mohana. Furthermore, earlier in November 1632 following Jahangir’s conversion of Todar Mal’s grant into a permanent imperial grant, the regime facilitated the transfer of the grant to Gosaindas from the previous priest Śrī Chanda. 120  Therefore in this way, Shah Jahan preserved the grant protocols established in Akbar and Jahangir’s reign. One can also infer that Jaisingh I’s influential role in the Mughal administration on behalf of the Kachvāhā clan was a significant factor in the grants continuing uninterrupted.

Fascinatingly, under the rule of Shah Jahan, the Mughal administration extended its involvement beyond grant allocation to also help direct the managerial operations of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples. The Mughal administration issued directives to increase Kachvāhā control over the managerial functions of the Govindadeva temple. This was primarily achieved by transferring the temple grants to the Amer house in 1633 rather than the temples directly. Consequently, Jaisingh I assumed control over the provision of a large portion of funds for the temples. A grant of 135 *bighās* was for instance assigned to Jaisingh I along with administrative control over the Govindadeva temple. This enabled him to nominate RādhāKṛṣṇa Dāsa Cakravartī to supervise worship at the temple and in 1652 to remove the followers of Hari Govinda. 121  In addition to maintaining the grants issued earlier and transferring the administrative power of temples, the Mughal administration also in some instances provided legitimisation for the ritual processes undertaken within temple. For example, it is described in official Mughal records that the use of the loud gong within the Madana-Mohana temple complex was to be permitted as it was considered an indispensable feature of worship. Therefore, in this period we even notice imperial recognition of and endorsement for the ceremonies of worship executed within temples. 122  

In Shah Jahan’s reign, Mughal participation in the management of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples was encouraged and even in several cases deemed vital to resolve disputes that arose. Previously, according to Akbar’s original *farman* in 1568 he vested administrative control of the Madana-Mohana and Govindadeva temples to Jīva, and Jīva in turn had passed control over to Kṛṣṇadāsa. 123  However, despite this resolution a dispute emerged between the lineages of Rūpa and Jīva. The alleged direct successors of Rūpa contended with the claim that Jīva and in turn Kṛṣṇadāsa were the rightful heirs. In response, the Mughal administration had to intercede and enforced the earlier *farman* directing that Kṛṣṇadāsa should assume administrative control of the two temples as ordained originally during the reign of Akbar. 124  There were also other cases of Mughal participation that were deemed integral to support the interests of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava leaders in Vṛndāvana. For instance, in 1641 a group of village men unlawfully sold land originally belonging to Rūpa, Sanātana and Jīva; subsequently the Mughal regime nullified the sale. Furthermore, in 1645, the headmen of Ariṭha 125  were accused of cutting down trees and blocking the path to the *kuṇḍa*, and once more the Mughal administration intervened to resolve the conflict. 126  From the examples shared, it is evident that the Mughal administration under Shah Jahan was perceived as indispensable for the protection of the established management protocols against disruptive forces and to resolve various conflicts that arose surrounding the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava estates in Vṛndāvana. 127  

In this section, it may be surmised that while the Kachvāhās remained valuable allies for the Mughals through Jaisingh I, under Shah Jahan, much like during the reign of Jahangir, their influence in the governmental affairs of the empire weakened. Some have claimed that in Shah Jahan’s reign, circumstances were less favourable for the Hindu nobles and populace; however, it is difficult to definitively determine whether this was the case, considering factors such as the influence of his favourite son, the broadminded Dara Shukoh. Furthermore, motivations for such acts as temple destruction have sometimes been ascribed to political concerns as opposed to being provoked by religious intolerance. Ironically, in the same year of the 1633 declaration, Shah Jahan also reissued grants for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples established during the rule of Akbar. The Mughal administration was also deemed imperative for upholding the managerial protocols and ownership of temples and sites belonging to the established Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava heirs in Vṛndāvana.

## Aurangzeb’s reign \(1658–1707\) 

### From Shah Jahan to Aurangzeb

From 1658 until his death in 1707, Aurangzeb became the sixth Mughal ruler, and the most controversial figure in Mughal history. He was also the final ruler of the Mughal Empire before its rapid decline from political dominion over the Indian subcontinent. During his reign, Aurangzeb engaged in almost perpetual warfare, assembling a large army he pursued military expansion along all frontiers of his empire. Subsequently, he successfully expanded the Mughal Empire’s domain to the greatest extent so far, ruling most of the Indian subcontinent. His ascendency to the Mughal throne however was not straightforward. Prior to being crowned ruler of the Mughal Empire, his father Shah Jahan’s health deteriorated, and it was widely believed his death was imminent. Consequently, a battle ensued between Shah Jahan’s four sons, which included the King’s favoured heir, the oldest son Dara Shukoh. Shah Jahan never swayed in his promotion of Dara Shukoh and evidence of Dara Shukoh’s favoured status is clear; for instance, by 1657, in the concluding phase of Shah Jahan’s rule, Dara Shukoh had been elevated to the exceptional rank of 50,000. In comparison, the aggregate ranking of his brothers Aurangzeb, Shuja and Murad was only 55,000. Furthermore, his brothers were continually tasked with assignments away from the imperial headquarters, whereas Dara was largely based at the imperial court within close proximity to Shah Jahan. 128  Seven years prior to his eventual death, Shah Jahan’s health severely deteriorated. Although he rapidly recovered within a brief period, nonetheless a war of succession ensued and was too far gone to halt. Aurangzeb emerged victorious, upon which he either imprisoned or killed his brothers. He even incarcerated his father, declaring him controversially unfit to rule. Indeed, Shah Jahan lived for another seven years, imprisoned inside the Agra fort which overlooked the Taj Mahal, where he was later buried beside his wife. 129  

In the early years of his reign, Aurangzeb upheld many of the customs and practices inherited from the earlier emperors. 130  Aurangzeb also adopted the strategy of forming alliances to fortify the sovereign reach of the empire comparable to his predecessors, such as Akbar. He retained good relations with the Rājputs and endeavoured to procure further diplomatic alliances. For instance, the Maratha King Shivaji after having been defeated was summoned to Agra for reconciliation and attempts were made to employ him and his forces in the imperial regime. However, in this instance, the plan failed and Shivaji escaped to the Deccan, where he led an independent Maratha kingdom. Aurangzeb has also been criticised for his maltreatment of non-Muslims, especially in comparison to his predecessors, exhibited by acts such as issuing decrees to desecrate temples in 1669 and re-establishing the *jizya*, a tax for non-Muslims in 1679. 131  Aurangzeb’s policies and approaches resulted in constant rebellions and wars, which led to the rapid depletion of the imperial treasury and army, and ultimately led to the beginning of the end of the Mughal Empire’s reign in the Indian subcontinent.

### Aurangzeb’s alliance with the Kachvāhās

Both Dara Shukoh and Aurangzeb, the foremost sons of Shah Jahan, had been aligning themselves with nobles of the court in expectation of the inevitable war for succession. Kachvāhā ruler Jaisingh I and Jaswantsingh of Mewar were the leading Rājput Kings at the time and were in direct correspondence with both Aurangzeb and Dara Shukoh. Following in the footsteps of his Kachvāhā predecessors, Jaisingh I began his Mughal career in 1617 at the mere age of 12. Jaisingh I’s accolades were numerous, experiencing successes in places as far as the Deccan and Central Asia. By 1637 his rank was raised to 5000, reflecting his accomplishments. However, despite his continued efforts and endeavours his rank was not increased further until after the civil war in 1657. In contrast, Jaswantsingh, who was both junior in respect to age and career, was conferred a rank of 7000 in early 1657. Jaisingh I seemed to ascribe his lower rank to his frail relationship with Dara, who amongst the princes exerted the greatest influence upon Emperor Shah Jahan. However, later in 1657 Jaisingh I’s fortunes took a turn for the better and he was also bestowed a rank of 7000. This coincided with an assignment to escort Dara’s eldest son, Sulaiman Shukoh, to capture Shuja, Shah Jahan’s second son. As long as Shah Jahan occupied the throne, Jaisingh I continued to serve Dara dutifully; however, once the political tide shifted with Aurangzeb emerging victorious in the battle for succession, Jaisingh I sided with the new ruler and played a pivotal role in the capture of Dara. During this period of political upheaval, it appears that the Kachvāhās had no particular affinity for either Dara or Aurangzeb, 132  nor did Aurangzeb have any reservations regarding the Kachvāhās at the time of accession, as witnessed from his efforts to form alliances with the Rājputs in general. 133  

Jaisingh I became a principal ally for Aurangzeb from the very inauguration of the new emperor’s reign. For instance, Jaisingh I was requested to negotiate with Jaswantsingh terms to forsake Dara, offering him full pardon and reinstatement. Upon Aurangzeb assuming the throne, Dara was forced to flee in defeat. Jaisingh I was tasked with pursuing Dara, who had fled afar. Dara was eventually treacherously captured by an old ally of his, a Baluch chief named Malik Jiwan, and presented to the presiding emperor. After transferring the captive Dara Shukoh to Delhi, Jaisingh I returned later from Sindh, with his army who were exhausted from the pursuit. Once Jaisingh I arrived in Delhi he opted not to partake in the debates at the royal court which concluded in a verdict to proceed with Dara’s execution. He also chose to not be an audience member to the humiliating public parade of the defeated Prince. The veteran Kachvāhā King was rewarded handsomely for his tremendous efforts. He had already attained the rank of 7000 which could not be exceeded unless one was of royal blood. 134  Jaisingh I, who had led the Kachvāhās from the reign of Jahangir, had achieved feats of heroism and military success in practically every part of the Mughal Empire.

A pivotal episode occurred in 1664, as Jaisingh I was assigned a new challenging task of subduing the Maratha King Shivaji, whose exploits had baffled every general that had challenged him. Indeed, Shivaji had greatly frustrated Aurangzeb, who had described Shivaji as a “mountain rat” and a disruptive rebel who resided in the hills. 135  Shivaji’s defying acts which embarrassed the Mughal regime included the killing of the Mughal noble Afzal Khan and wounding Aurangzeb’s maternal uncle Shaista Khan. 136  He also managed to kill one of Aurangzeb’s sons and plundered the wealthy city of Surat for four continuous days in 1664. At the senior age of 55 Jaisingh I embarked on this perplexing task, hoping to subdue a petty lord who in less than 10 years succeeded in defying the Mughal regime. 137  

Remarkably through his military expertise, in the span of only three months Jaisingh I succeeded in forcing Shivaji to concede and publicly acknowledge the supremacy of the Mughal Empire. This brought great joy to the Emperor and once again Jaisingh I was rewarded for his efforts. Although Shivaji had been defeated, Jaisingh I had a far grander plan. He hoped this setback for Shivaji would lead to him becoming a principal ally for the Mughal emperor just as his family had been for many years. Therefore, Jaisingh I implored Shivaji to visit the court of Akbar. To entice Shivaji he assured him that he would be the recipient of numerous rewards and would receive recognition for his service to the empire. Nevertheless, Shivaji and his comrades resisted due to their distrust of the Mughals. They finally relented as Jaisingh I went to great lengths to assure the safety of Shivaji, even assigning his very own son Rāmsingh to be the caretaker of Shivaji during this visit. Thus, Jaisingh I advocated a policy of befriending Shivaji and of utilising his services. Unfortunately, however, Aurangzeb never fully appreciated his strategy. Due to a combination of Aurangzeb’s neglect and Rāmsingh’s carelessness, Shivaji felt insulted during his visit to Aurangzeb’s court, jeopardising Jaisingh I’s diplomatic efforts and transforming the Maratha King into Aurangzeb’s arch enemy. 138  

During Shivaji’s visit to Aurangzeb’s court a series of incidents occurred that severed the fragile relations between Shivaji and the Mughal emperor. Firstly, Shivaji felt slighted for having been seated in a section reserved for lower nobles in the audience hall. Furthermore, when Shivaji came before Aurangzeb he was neglected as Aurangzeb became preoccupied with other matters that were of concern. These insults, coupled with Jaswantsingh being bestowed a higher rank than Shivaji, greatly disturbed him, leading him to be vocal about his qualms in the court. Observing Shivaji’s disturbed state Aurangzeb requested Rāmsingh to remove Shivaji from the court and to escort him back to his quarters to reason with him. However, it proved to be impossible to appease him and hence other court nobles became hostile towards him and urged the emperor to punish him by killing or imprisoning him, as the prestige of the empire was at stake. Shaista Khan also reminded Aurangzeb of Shivaji’s treacherous nature and warned Aurangzeb not to provide him a private audience. 139  Rāmsingh had been entrusted by his father with the responsibility of hosting Shivaji; therefore, he protested recollecting his father’s pledge to Shivaji. While the emperor was considering how to proceed, Shivaji was confined to his tent under house arrest, close to Rāmsingh’s camp, which was continually patrolled. Jaisingh I was placed in a dilemma by the unforeseen aftermath of Shivaji’s visit to the court. He struggled to convince the emperor that by killing or imprisoning Shivaji the empire would certainly not benefit. Whilst Aurangzeb was pondering his options, Shivaji, growing restless, was also evaluating his options and eventually devised a plot for his own escape. He firstly sent away his comrades and servants, to ensure their safety. A short time later he feigned illness and as a tribute for his betterment he sent out sweets every evening to *brahmins*. At first the guards checked the baskets regularly, but later allowed them to pass unchecked. Shivaji capitalised on this opportunity and along with his son slipped into two baskets that were safely sent out. The baskets were deposited outside the city, and from there Shivaji and his son proceeded to Mathurā in disguise. They continued to their home in the mountains of Maharashtra; however, to deceive his pursuers, Shivaji strategically took a longer path, journeying via Benares concealed as a pilgrim, assisted by *brahmins* on this journey. 140  Following this escape the emperor’s suspicions fell upon Rāmsingh and the Kachvāhās in general, who had assumed responsibility of Shivaji. As an immediate response Rāmsingh was forbidden from the court, his rank was reduced by one thousand and his estates were removed. It was only seven months later that Rāmsingh was allowed to re-enter the court upon the intervention of Jaswantsingh in 1667. During this period Jaisingh I also encountered frustration in breaching the Deccan area; this became a further source of irritation for Aurangzeb, who also held him partly responsible for his son’s role in Shivaji’s escape. After Jaisingh I’s retirement from the Deccan, he was recalled to the court and Prince Muzzam, assisted by Jaswantsingh, was tasked with penetrating the Deccan. Jaisingh I’s brilliant career, which had spanned the reign of three Mughal emperors, was tainted by a disappointing ending. Broken-hearted from the setback and suffering in old age, Jaisingh I died in 1667. 141  After Jaisingh I’s death in 1667, no longer was the alliance with Kachvāhās as intimate or as strong as it once was, and hence commenced a testing period for the Mughal–Kachvāhā alliance.

Following the death of Jaisingh I, Rāmsingh became the subsequent King of Amer and ruler of the Kachvāhā clan. Between the years of 1667 and 1676 Rāmsingh was directed to serve the empire in Assam. Warfare in Assam was extremely unpopular, and no soldier would go there unless compelled. Therefore, it was thought by some that Rāmsingh’s sentence to Assam was further punishment for his role in Shivaji’s escape. Rāmsingh’s efforts there were expectedly futile, and he left in deep disappointment. During this period Rāja Jaswantsingh, while serving as protector of the Khyber Pass, died there in 1678. 142  Thus, Rāmsingh became the most prominent Rājput King and was assigned to be the warden of the Khyber Pass in Afghanistan, under Amir Khan. In 1682, Rāmsingh received the tragic news that his only son, Kishan Singh, had died. Shortly after that, Rāmsingh himself also died, leaving the fate of the Kachvāhā dynasty in jeopardy. Bishansingh, his grandson, became the Kachvāhā ruler in 1688. He spent much of his time within the Mathurā district engaged in warfare with the *Jāṭs*. Aurangzeb was continually disappointed with Bishansingh’s lack of success and had him removed as governor of Mathurā and looked to Bishansingh’s son, Jaisingh II, for hope. With the ascendency of Jaisingh II, the Kachvāhā dynasty enters another prosperous period comparable to only Mānsingh or Jaisingh I’s early reign. The 32 years before Jaisingh II had been a difficult time for the Kachvāhās; however, the new ruler became a beacon of light for the Kachvāhā clan emerging from this period of darkness. 143  

### Aurangzeb’s desecration of Vṛndāvana temples

The rapid decline in relations between the Mughals and Kachvāhās during Aurangzeb’s reign as well as Aurangzeb’s ostensibly growing anti-Hindu stance 144  triggered a detrimental impact upon the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community and the temples in Vṛndāvana. The prosperity and stability that Vṛndāvana experienced during the sixteenth century would eventually come to a halt during the reign of Aurangzeb in the mid-seventeenth century.

In the initial phase of his reign Aurangzeb continued to preserve the grants and management protocols established in temples in Vṛndāvana in the same way as his predecessors. For instance, in 1659, following the stipulation introduced by his father Shah Jahan, which entailed reallocating control of the Govindadeva temple to the Amer family, in light of a dispute surrounding the Govindadeva temple, Aurangzeb referred the matter to the discretion of the then Kachvāhā ruler, Jaisingh I. A temple priest known as Kṛṣṇadāsa had been assigned to manage the affairs and possessions of Jīva, which included administration of the Govindadeva temple. However, he was accused of attaining that position by deception; consequently, a *farman* was issued by Jaisingh I to appoint Śivarāma as the preferred caretaker of the Govindadeva deity. From then on Śivarāma considered the land his own. Thus, Jaisingh I used his imperial influence to issue the order that the lands and retreats of Jīva should be under the custodianship of Śivarāma. 145  

Aurangzeb’s oppressive actions within Vṛndāvana commenced substantially in 1665, seven years into his reign, which coincides with the episode of Shivaji’s escape, in which the Kachvāhās were considered chief culprits, particularly Jaisingh I’s son, Rāmsingh. With the diminishing power of the Rājputs in the Mughal Empire and Aurangzeb’s general disappointment with them, Aurangzeb seems to have adopted an alternative direction in his political strategy. Aurangzeb’s actions in Vṛndāvana also provoked the *Jāṭ* peasants under their leader Gokulā to rise in revolt. Consequently, Vṛndāvana was constantly ablaze from April 1669 to January 1670. During this period, Mathurā and Vṛndāvana were even renamed to Islamabad and Muminabad, although in reality the new labels were only ever used in official documentation. 146  In January 1670 Aurangzeb also ordered the demolition of the renowned Keśavadeva temple of Mathurā. 147  The temple was a grand monument necessitating excessive efforts from Aurangzeb’s soldiers to accomplish the task. 148  The demolition of this temple followed a decree to desecrate temples in 1669 by Aurangzeb. SāqI Mustad Kahn, a contemporary historian of Aurangzeb’s reign, recorded that on April 1669 his majesty, “eager to establish Islam, issued orders to the governors to demolish the schools and temples of the infidels and with the utmost urgency put down the teaching and the public practice of the religion of these misbelievers.” 149  Challenging this viewpoint other perspectives have been put forward to counter claims that an anti-Hindu sentiment was the primary motivation inciting the destruction of temples witnessed in this period. For instance, it has been claimed that the policy to cease construction of new temples was not introduced by Aurangzeb but was rather the continuation of a policy already in practice under his father, Shah Jahan. Furthermore, the temples that were destroyed in numerous instances were temples which were akin to symbols of political power, and thus the demolition was deemed to be necessary acts of retaliation for cases of aggression exhibited against the empire. For example, the destruction of the Keśavadeva temple in Mathurā was declared to be a reprisal for the troublesome *Jāṭ* rebellions in the Mathurā area. 150  It has also been claimed that the destruction of this temple was judged to be retaliation for the *brahmins* in Mathurā who had provided aid to Shivaji and his son in their controversial escape. Other reasons have also been ascribed to the link between the temple and Aurangzeb’s rival brother Dara Shukoh who had sponsored the stone railings of the construction. 151  Hence, several alternative explanations have been postulated that demonstrate varied motivations behind the demolition of the temples. 152  

In this period, in 1679, the *jizya* tax was also revived for all non-Muslims. Aurangzeb’s motivations for reintroducing the *jizya* tax have also been debated. Jadunath Sarkar has argued that the emperor’s motive was to encourage non-Muslims to convert to Islam, which would eventually lead to a nation-wide Islamic state. 153  However, others such as Satish Chandra have suggested that the purpose behind the tax was far more nuanced and states that the reinstatement of the *jizya* tax was a political and ideological move to develop his personal brand to remodel himself as an orthodox Muslim King. 154  He expected this shift would help rally Muslim support, not only in conflicts with the Rājputs and the Marathas but also in his battles with the Muslim kingdoms in Deccan. The reestablishment of the *jizya* tax certainly magnified the divide between the Mughals and the Hindu nobles and accelerated the fragmentation of the empire. However, it has been claimed that Aurangzeb had no alternative than to appeal to the loyalty of the orthodox Muslim branch considering the ever-increasing mounting opposition to the empire from the Hindu populace. 155  Earlier he had appealed to the same orthodox group as he executed Dara and imprisoned Murad on the premise of them having transgressed Islamic laws. Another perspective expounded states that he was forced to introduce the tax due to a serious depletion in funds expended due to his constant battles. Consequently, the *jizya* tax was introduced 21 years after he came to power to replenish the imperial treasury. Interestingly, in spite of the tax being instilled there is no evidence of its imposition leading to conversions. 156  

Considering that Vṛndāvana became a target of Aurangzeb’s wrath, the ramifications for the Govindadeva temple, being one of the grandest temples in North India, are insightful. The deity was especially valued by the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sect, having been founded by sect leader Rūpa, and also became a symbol of Kachvāhā power in North India. Amidst the devastation in Vṛndāvana, intriguingly, the temple was not demolished but only partially desecrated. When a construction was demolished under the instructions of Aurangzeb the party that was dispatched to fulfil the task would report back the resources utilised to undertake the task. Such reports exist for temples in Mathurā and Varanasi, but not for the Govindadeva temple. Considering the close bond between the Govindadeva temple and the Kachvāhā family, since the reign of Akbar, it could be inferred that the treatment of the Govindadeva temple reflected Aurangzeb’s own dwindling alliance with the Kachvāhās. Therefore, the desecration of the temple has been attributed as a fitting reprisal for the Kachvāhās due to Aurangzeb’s suspicions of Rāmsingh’s involvement in Shivaji’s escape. It also appears that completely destroying the Govindadeva temple would have entirely severed ties between the Kachvāhās and the Mughals, pitting the Kachvāhā family against the Mughals. Along with his other numerous enemies, the situation would have been extremely intolerable and untenable for Aurangzeb; therefore, he may have deemed partial demolition of the temple to be a fitting punishment. 157  

According to Fergusson’s *History of Indian and Eastern Architecture* the Govindadeva temple’s upper parts are claimed to have been torn down by Aurangzeb, “who is said to have erected … a place for Muslim prayer on the roof.” 158  Furthermore, many of the figures in the doorway have been carefully defaced. There even appears to be a mutilated image of a figure’s head with a Turkish turban, which could have portrayed Akbar, as the image is larger than the others. 159  Its inner sanctum, which housed the deity and was therefore its most sacred portion, was virtually demolished. In addition, smaller shrines contained within this great compound were also destroyed. 160  This once important place of pilgrimage and former symbol of robust Mughal–Kachvāhā–Gauḍīya relations was left severely damaged and desolate during the reign of Aurangzeb, reflecting the deterioration in this alliance. In the same way, former Kachvāhā ruler Mānsingh’s famous Viśvanātha temple in Benares was also demolished as retaliation for Kachvāhā involvement in Shivaji’s escape. Such temples had been constructed using Mughal resources and were symbols of Kachvāhā prestige; therefore, in response to apparently violating long-established allegiances, the prized possessions of the Kachvāhās were targets of destruction. 161  

In this difficult period, despite the attacks on their temples, the Kachvāhās still strived to remain the protectors of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava deities such as Govindadeva. The Kachvāhās collaborated with the priests of the Govindadeva temple to provide safe passage for the deity prior to the desecration of the temple. A letter from Rāmsingh to his minister in 1671 records that Govindadeva was transported to Kāmān arriving from Vṛndāvana. The minister was requested to arrange further provisions for the deity’s safe passage to Govindapura \(Rūpaheda\). Nevertheless, Govindadeva was not taken immediately and appeared to have remained in Kāmān for a further four years. 162  Indeed, the Govindadeva deity never returned to Vṛndāvana. One plausible reason provided was that after the death of Jaisingh I in 1667, the Kachvāhās would not be able to ensure the protection of the deity from the destruction of the Mughal rulers in Vṛndāvana. Consequently, the priests were keen to relocate Govindadeva to a more secure and distant location like Govindagadha, where the images could be concealed within a fort and the greater distance from Vṛndāvana further ensured protection. 163  From here, Govindadeva was eventually taken to Amer, the homeland of the Kachvāhās in 1714. However, it wasn’t just Govindadeva amongst the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava deities that was relocated to ensure protection. For example, Rādhā-damodara, the deities of Jīva, were eventually moved to Jaipur and the deity of Sanātana, Madana-Mohana was taken to Karauli in 1728 by Rāja Gopalsingh, a brother-in-law of Jaisingh II, who went on to construct a temple for the deities opposite his palace. 164  However, Gopal Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s deities of Rādhā-Rāman, due to their smaller size, appeared to have remained concealed in Vṛndāvana. As there was no temple established for the deity as of yet to attract the attention of the Mughals, the deities were hidden. The deity of Banke-Bihārī also remained concealed in Vṛndāvana during this period. The image of Rādhā-Vallabha worshipped by the Rādhā-Vallabhite community was transferred to Kāmān and remained there before being returned to Vṛndāvana in the late eighteenth century. This period impacted Vṛndāvana radically; many images that had departed from Vṛndāvana for safety never returned to the area again. By the end of the eighteenth century Vṛndāvana had transformed drastically, initiated by the faltering Mughal–Kachvāhā alliance. Indeed, no longer would Vṛndāvana attain the same fortunes that it once enjoyed under the Mughal Empire. 165   

### Demise of Aurangzeb and rise of Kachvāhā King Jaisingh II

Aurangzeb’s reign was characterised by his continual warfare, especially with the Marathas and the conquest of Deccan. This endeavour drove his empire to the brink of bankruptcy, as Stanley Wolpert describes:
>  
> The conquest of the Deccan, to which Aurangzeb devoted the last 26 years of his life, was in many ways a Pyrrhic victory, costing an estimated hundred thousand lives a year during its last decade of futile chess game warfare. The expense in gold and rupees can hardly be accurately estimated. Aurangzeb’s encampment was like a moving capital – a city of tents 30 miles in circumference, with some 250 bazaars, with a 1/2 million camp followers, 50,000 camels and 30,000 elephants, all of whom had to be fed, stripped the Deccan of any and all of its surplus grain and wealth … Not only famine but bubonic plague arose … Even Aurangzeb, had ceased to understand the purpose of it all by the time he was nearing 90 … “I came alone and I go as a stranger. I do not know who I am, nor what I have been doing,” the dying old man confessed to his son, Azam, in February 1707. 166  

As well as great resources being depleted owing to constant warfare, the empire was in disarray, accelerated by Aurangzeb’s inability to settle issues in his provinces. 167  As Aurangzeb’s reign was coming to an end with a crumbling Mughal Empire, Jaisingh II inherited the throne of Amer in 1699, ruling till 1743. Despite being very young, he played a pivotal role in the politics of North India. Quickly, he established himself as a critical member of Aurangzeb’s court, assisting the emperor in numerous ways, including subduing the *Jāṭ*s. He was rewarded handsomely for his efforts, showered with gifts and grand titles. His younger son Shivsingh was elevated to governor of Mathurā and also deputised for his father as governor of Agra. Jaisingh II also utilised his political status to aid the Hindu populace in the Mughal Empire against Hindu-centric taxes that were deemed to be unjust. 168  

Jaisingh II’s fortunes were short-lived, as upon Aurangzeb’s death the Mughal Empire became embroiled in a war of succession. Jaisingh II had sided with Muhammad Azam Shah, but Bahudar Shah emerged victorious, and as reprisal Bahudar commanded that Jaisingh II be displaced as ruler in Amer by his younger brother Vijaysingh. Jaisingh II and his armies were exiled from the city. However, with Bahudar preoccupied in the Deccan, Jaisingh II swiftly recaptured the city with the assistance of the armies of the Rājput kingdoms of Mewar and Marwar. Relations between Jaisingh II and the Mughals were eventually repaired, and Jaisingh II was reinstated in the administration of the Mughal regime, appointed governor of Malwa and Agra, and received a *mansab* of 7000. 169  

After the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, numerous conflicts emerged, which contributed to the breakdown of the Mughal regime, and the once formidable empire gradually became more and more fractured. This period witnessed a rise in rebellions and a trend to openly assert one’s independence from the empire as regional leaders. 170  Therefore, uprisings emerged amongst the zamindars in Bengal and Bihar, and the provincial leaders such as the Rājputs, Sikhs and Afghans, who became less obedient to the Mughal ruler. 171  After the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, Jaisingh II had set his sights on constructing a new power base representative of a rejuvenated Kachvāhā power. It was hoped that the new city would have a robust religious and intellectual foundation, and the deity of Govindadeva, which had been the object of devotion for the Kachvāhās since the time of Bhārmal, would lie at the heart of the new city. The revival of the Kachvāhās would also be reflected in the rejuvenated status of Govindadeva, a long-time symbol of Kachvāhā prestige. Consequently, Govindadeva’s status evolved from the family deity of the Kachvāhās to becoming the presiding state deity of their new capital city, Jaipur. The residence of Govindadeva in Jaipur was known as the Govinda *Mahala* or palace instead of a *Mandira* or temple. This implies that Govindadeva was now the tutelary deity of the Kachvāhās, virtually given the status of sovereign of the state. Jaisingh \(Jaisingh\) II dedicated the new city to Govindadeva and continually sought refuge of the deity, evidenced by the inscription of his official seal which states: “Savai Jaisingh II has found shelter at the feet of Govindadevaji,” which his descendants have observed to this day. This episode marks the culmination of the Kachvāhās’ dedication to Govindadeva, which began with Rāja Bhārmal approximately 150 years earlier when he was awarded the first land grant for Govindadeva in Vṛndāvana. 172  

This section began by describing the contribution of Jaisingh I, who continued to support the empire faithfully in the initial phase of Aurangzeb’s rule, having served the Mughal regime throughout the reign of Shah Jahan, wherein he negotiated an alliance with Jaswantsingh, played a vital role in the capture of Dara and even overcame Shivaji to aid the expansion of the Mughal Empire. However, his policy to befriend Shivaji backfired and weakened the once strong alliance with Aurangzeb, who never fully appreciated the genius of his strategy. Aurangzeb became further dissatisfied with the Kachvāhā efforts, accentuated by their suspected participation in the escape of Shivaji. This was exhibited by the treatment of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples in Vṛndāvana connected to the Kachvāhās. During this challenging period, the Kachvāhā clan continued to strive to protect Govindadeva by providing safe passage and harbour during the attack. As the Mughal Empire deteriorated during the end of Aurangzeb’s reign, Jaisingh II at a tender age emerged as the new leader of the Kachvāhā dynasty in 1699. After over 30 years of toil for the family, the Kachvāhās entered an era of political stability and growth. Jaisingh II pioneered the creation of a new Kachvāhā state with Govindadeva at the heart of his new city, Jaipur. It also marks the apex of the Kachvāhā efforts to support Govindadeva, beginning from Rāja Bhārmal, who ensured the first land grant for Govindadeva, to his grandson Mānsingh, who leveraged Mughal resources to construct a regal monument for Govindadeva.

## Conclusion 

Despite the long-standing historical connection of Kṛṣṇa *bhakti* to Vṛndāvana, places of pilgrimage relating to Kṛṣṇa did not dominate the area until the early sixteenth century. Prior to the sixteenth century, historical sites within Vṛndāvana appear lost; numerous raids upon Mathurā also obscure the matter further. Local *bhakti* traditions and archaeological excavations also indicate that Vṛndāvana was all but barren of pilgrimage sites of Kṛṣṇa until Vaiṣṇava reformers such as Caitanya arrived in Vṛndāvana in the sixteenth century. This period of transformation in Vṛndāvana was initially prompted by communities such as the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas of Bengal, some of whom settled in Vṛndāvana with the purpose of rediscovering the land of Kṛṣṇa. However, they were not alone in this endeavour, as the political influences of the day provided generous patronage and resources to facilitate their ambitions. The favourable political situation and stability proved to be crucial in order for Vṛndāvana to flourish with new temples emerging. This remarkable situation under the Mughal regime allowed Hindu royalty to participate in their traditional duties as Hindu rulers and yet remain committed to the Mughal establishment. The rediscovery of Vṛndāvana coincided with the demise of the Sultanate and the advent of the Mughal Empire.

In this extraordinary era, we notice the Kachvāhā rulers and those in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community adapting to the socio-political and economic changes that emerged with the ascendancy of the Mughal regime. Although there were numerous successes with this new-found Mughal–Kachvāhā coalition, for a variety of reasons, the Mughal–Kachvāhā union did not fulfil its potential. The intimate relationship between these two dynasties developed to support political ambitions; however, when the political circumstances changed either due to ambitions being met or rulers of the dynasties changing, the alliance waned. The Mughal interest in the Kachvāhās was based largely on the utility and resources offered by the rulers to the empire. Therefore, the alliance grew and waned according to the resourcefulness of the Kachvāhā ruler that occupied the throne at Amer. Cooperation between the two political dynasties also required an empire that was multireligious in character. Although high ideals were established by Akbar, it seems later Mughal emperors were not able to retain the same multireligious culture as evidenced by the introduction of decrees to demolish temples under Shah Jahan and Aurangzeb, even if such declarations were often spurred by political objectives.

As the Mughal–Kachvāhā alliance fluctuated, as political players came and went, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples like Govindadeva in Vṛndāvana faced prosperity and threats accordingly. There appeared to be a direct correlation between the strength of the Mughal–Kachvāhā coalition and the fortunes experienced by the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava temples. Akbar’s era was a golden period for this alliance, which saw the Kachvāhā’s promoted to the highest positions in the Mughal court, particularly through Mānsingh and Bhagavāndāsa. This was reflected in the prosperity witnessed in various parts of Vṛndāvana exemplified by the erection of an impressive temple for Govindadeva. In the subsequent reigns of Shah Jahan and Jahangir, although the Amer family didn’t obtain the same positional heights as witnessed in Akbar’s rule, they nevertheless remained crucial contributors in the empires that followed. This was especially illustrated by Jaisingh I, whose reign spanned both Mughal rulers, serving dutifully and successfully, accomplishing great deeds for both rulers. The grants issued earlier in Vṛndāvana during Akbar’s reign were preserved by both Jahangir and Shah Jahan; in fact there were also improvements in the patronage allotted. A further development during their reigns was the transfer of administrative control of key temples like the Govindadeva temple to the Amer family, illustrating the intimacy between the Kachvāhās and Govindadeva. However, during Aurangzeb’s reign, there was a dramatic decline in the fortunes of the temples of Vṛndāvana, which witnessed Govindadeva, like many other deities who were under threat, being secretly escorted outside Vṛndāvana. This change in fortune coincides with a breakdown in the Kachvāhā–Mughal alliance, caused by Aurangzeb’s distrust of the Kachvāhās due to their alleged participation in the escape of Shivaji. The Kachvāhā dynasty had been intimately connected with the fortunes of Govindadeva, beginning with the initial construction of the majestic temple in Vṛndāvana to providing regular patronage and administrative aid; therefore, even in times of crisis, the Kachvāhās continued to exhibit their devotion for Govindadeva. The Kachvāhās sought safe passage for the deity, eventually relocating Govindadeva to the safe haven of the new Kachvāhā capital city of Jaipur. With the new residence of Govindadeva, the deity founded by the renowned Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava teacher Rūpa, so begins a new chapter of engagement between the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition and Kachvāhā ruler Jaisingh II, which will be depicted in the following chapter.

## Notes

1.  Caitanya \(1486–1534\) is a Bengal *brahmin* turned ascetic, whose followers accept him to be divine, and is considered the founder of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school. 
2.  Dimock, Edward C., Stewart, Tony K, *Caitanya-caritāmṛta of Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja* \(Cambridge, 1999\), p. 611 \(CC 2.19 in Śloka 1\) and p. 618 \(CC 2.19.108\). \[All references to *Caitanya-caritāmṛta* will be from Edward Dimock and Tony Stewart’s edition going forward.\] 
3.  Tarapada Mukherjee, and Irfan Habib, “Land Rights in the Reign of Akbar,” in *Proceedings of the Indian History Congress* \(Gorakhpur, 1989\), p. 237. 
4.  This also included teachers from other Vaiṣṇava groups such as the Vallabha tradition. 
5.  John Stratton Hawley, *A Storm of Songs* \(Massachusetts, 2015\), p. 150. 
6.  Charlotte Vaudeville, *Myths, Saints, and Legends in Medieval India* \(Bombay, 1996\), p. 47. 
7.  Heidi Pauwels, “A Tale of Two Temples: Mathurā’s Keśavadeva and Orcchā’s Caturbhujadeva” in Rosalind O’Hanlon and David Washbrook, Ed., *Religious Cultures in Early Modern India* \(London, 2012\), p. 148. 
8.  Alan W. Entwistle, *Braj, Centre of Krishna Pilgrimage* \(Groningen, 1987\), p. 134. 
9.  Vaudeville, *Myths, Saints, and Legends in Medieval India*, p. 53. 
10.  Satish Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies* \(New Delhi, 1993\), p. 28. 
11.  The regions ruled by the Sultans or “rulers” were known as the Sultanate. 
12.  Sultan of the Ghurid Empire. 
13.  Peter A. Jackson, *The Delhi Sultanate* \(Cambridge, 1999\), p. 27. 
14.  Jackson, *The Delhi Sultanate*, p. 44. 
15.  Romila Thapar, *The Penguin History of Early India* \(London, 2003\), p. 275. 
16.  Thapar, *The Penguin History of Early India*, p. 288. 
17.  Jackson, *The Delhi Sultanate*, p. 324. 
18.  Moin, A. Azfar, *The Millennial Sovereign* \(New York, 2012\), p. 21. 
19.  Catherine B. Asher and Cynthia Talbot. *India before Europe* \(Cambridge, 2006\), p. 116. 
20.  Asher and Talbot, *India before Europe*, p. 123. 
21.  Asher and Talbot, *India before Europe*, p. 124. 
22.  Jadunath Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur* \(Delhi, 1984\), p. 20. 
23.  The name of the place “Amer” is the modern equivalent of “Amber.” 
24.  Hortsmann Monika, *Jaipur 1778: The Making of a King* \(Germany, 2013\), p. 20. 
25.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 31. 
26.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 30–34. 
27.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 34–35. 
28.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 35. 
29.  Chandra, * Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 17. 
30.  Ali Muhammad Mohar, *History of the Muslims of Bengal* \(Riyadh, 1985\), p. 183 and p. 191. 
31.  \(CC\(CC 2.1.174\), p. 346. 
32.  \(CC\(CC 2.1.165\), p. 346. 
33.  Dr OBL Kapoor states *Dabir Khasa* is derived from the Persian word *Dabir-i-khasa*, which means private secretary. “*Malik*” is derived from the Arabic “*Malik*” which means King; *Sakara* is derived from Arabic “*Sagira*” which means sub or under the King.  
\[Dr O.B.L. Kapoor, *The Gosvamis of Vrndavana* \(New Delhi, 1995\), p. 37\] 
34.  Taraphadāra Mamatājura Rahamāna, *Husain Shahi Bengal* \(Dacca, 1965\), p. 100. 
35.  Jagadish Narayan Sarkar, *Hindu-Muslim Relations in Bengal* \(Delhi, 1985\), p. 34. 
36.  \(CC\(CC 2.19.20–24\), pp. 612–613. 
37.  Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, the author of the *Caitanya-caritāmṛta*, and the Gosvāmīs such as Rūpa and Sanātana were close associates in Vṛndāvana; this may have influenced his portrayal of them in his work. Indeed, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja is credited with equating the theology proposed by the Gosvamis with the direct instructions of Caitanya. Therefore, according to the Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja the Gosvāmīs had been empowered by Caitanya to provide a theological basis and justification for the practice adopted by his followers. \[Stewart, Tony K., *Final Word: The Caitanya-caritāmṛta and the Grammar of Religious Tradition* \(New York, 2010\), p. 199.\] In contrast, in other well-known biographies such as the *Caitanya Bhāgavata*, Rūpa and Sanātana are seldom mentioned. 
38.  In the conclusion of Jīva Gosvāmī’s *Laghu-Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī* he states the following in respect to the ancestral lineage of his uncle Sanātana Gosvāmī. Sanātana had given his *Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī* commentary to Jīva, who edited it as the *Laghu-Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī*. In the description, he claims that Sanātana and Rūpa were descendants of a respected family of *brahmins* who were part of the royalty of Karnataka. Their earliest ancestor was known as Sarvājñā, a *brahmin* descending from the Bharadvāja *gotra* or lineage. He was the most respectable *brahmin* of Karnataka. He became the King of the region in the fourteenth century. He was extremely learned and often labelled “*Jagad-guru*” or world-teacher. His son was Aniruddha, and also ruled as King. Aniruddha had two sons, Rupeśvara and Harihara. Rupeśvara was expert in all scriptural learning. His brother Harihara excelled in the scriptures concerning royal politics. Upon his death, although Aniruddha had divided his realm, Rupeśvara was forced to leave his ancestral home, Karnataka, for Paurastya with his wife. There, he became the friend of the King, Raja Śrī Shekhareśvar. Rupeśvara’s son was Padmanabha, who was a great scholar in the Vedic scriptures. Padmanabha settled at Navahatta \(Naihatti\) on the banks of the Ganges in Bengal. He had 18 daughters and 5 sons. All his sons were expert in the scriptures. The names of his sons were Purushottama, Jagannatha, Narayana, Murari and Mukunda. His youngest son, Mukunda, moved to Fateyabada near Jessore in Bakla Chandradwip Paragana. Śrī Mukundadeva’s son was Śrī Kumaradeva. He had many children, including Rūpa, Sanātana and Anupama, father of Jīva. \[Neal Delmonico, *Sacred Rapture: A Study of the Religious Aesthetic of Rupa Gosvamin* \(Chicago, 1990\), pp. 276–279.\] 
39.  Delmonico, * Sacred Rapture*, p. 278. 
40.  Hence, it could also be presumed that after having moved there, the family sought employment with the regime. 
41.  According to *Bhakti-rātnakara* 1.580–83 which is a text by Narahari Cakravati in the eighteenth century it is described they took up these roles out of fear of Husain Shah \(Delmonico, *Sacred Rapture*, p. 282\). Dr OBL Kapoor shares more details to this version of events, a mason had been executed on account of an offense, leaving his work on a particular tower half-finished. The King, noticing the incomplete mason-work, requested one of his accompanying soldiers to go to Moragram. However, the King’s attention was unexpectedly diverted before he could instruct his soldier to fully enable him to secure suitable masons in Moragram to complete the work on the tower. The soldier, being fearful of disobeying the order of the King, departed for Moragram, bereft of any directions. Despondent, the soldier chanced upon Sanātana, who enquired as to the reasons for the soldier’s moroseness. On hearing of the soldier’s unusual dilemma, Sanātana could understand the intentions of the King, and advised the soldier to return to the King with masons to complete the unfinished tower. When the King saw that the soldier had returned with masons despite not being specifically instructed to do so, he was astounded and asked the soldier to explain what had happened. The soldier related his encounter with Sanātana, and the King, who was already acquainted with the fame of the brothers, sent a request for the brothers to work under his administration. The brothers were afraid that a rejection might invite a vicious retaliation, and therefore agreed unwillingly to accept the offer. According to this account, the King heard about the illustrious reputation of the brothers and openly insisted on their attendance at his court, threatening to kill several innocent members of the community should they refuse. These accounts suggest that the brothers only accepted their posts out of fear \(Kapoor, *The Gosvamis of Vrndavana*, pp. 36–37\). 
42.  Taraphadāra, *Husain Shahi Bengal*, p. 335.  
Delmonico, *Sacred Rapture*, p. 282 \(*Bhakti-rātnakara* 1.592–94\). 
43.  Kapoor, *The Gosvamis of Vrndavana*, p. 35. 
44.  Sarkar, *Hindu-Muslim Relations in Bengal*, p. 42. 
45.  Rūpa’s *Hamsadutta* 141 refers to Sanātana as Sarkar which indicates that this was written during the time of their occupations for the Sultan and before they met Caitanya \(Reference provided by Dr Rembert Lutjeharms\). 
46.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 18. 
47.  Asher and Talbot. *India before Europe*, pp. 125–126. 
48.  Jadunath Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 37–38. 
49.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 22. 
50.  Jadunath Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 46–50. 
51.  Jadunath Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 63. 
52.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 29. 
53.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 24. 
54.  Jadunath Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 75. 
55.  Athar Ali M, *The Mughal Nobility under Aurangzeb* \(Delhi, 2001\), p. 7. 
56.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 32. 
57.  Catherine B. Asher, “Kacchavaha Pride and Prestige: The Temple Patronage of Rāja Māna Simha” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), p. 215. 
58.  R. Nath, “Śrī Govindadeva’s Itinerary from Vṛndāvana to Jayapura” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), p. 163. 
59.  Jadunath Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 86. 
60.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 24. 
61.  Entwistle, *Braj Centre of Krishna Pilgrimage*, pp. 159–160. 
62.  Hawley, *A Storm of Songs*, p. 151. 
63.  Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, *Akbar and the Temples of Mathurā and Its Environs* \(Dabolim, 1987\), p. 236. 
64.  Nalini Thakur, “Building of Govindadeva” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), p. 23. 
65.  There is also a reference in an inscription by Jīva that architects from Delhi had been employed for the construction of the Govindadeva temple. The inscription will be shared later in this chapter. 
66.  George Michell, “Missing Sanctuary” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), p. 119. 
67.  Shrivatsa Gosvāmī, “Govinda Darśana: Lotus in Stone” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), pp. 269–277. 
68.  Gosvāmī, “Govinda Darśana,” p. 275. 
69.  Tarpada Mukherjee,* Manuscripts and Documents in Gauḍīya Temples of Vrindavan and Rājasthan* \(Vrindavan, 1980\), p. 16. 
70.  Kiyokazu Okita, *Hindu Theology in Early Modern South Asia* \(Oxford, 2014\), p. 28. 
71.  Asher, “Kacchavaha Pride and Prestige,” p. 216. 
72.  Gopal Narayan Bahura, “Śrī Govinda Gāthā Service Rendered to Govinda,” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), p. 199. 
73.  Bahura, “Śrī Govinda Gāthā Service,” p. 199. 
74.  Asher, “Kacchavaha Pride and Prestige,” p. 216. 
75.  Asher, “Kacchavaha Pride and Prestige,” p. 220. 
76.  Asher, “Kacchavaha Pride and Prestige,” p. 215. 
77.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 71. 
78.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 72. 
79.  Entwistle, *Braj Centre of Krishna Pilgrimage*, p. 160. 
80.  Mukherjee and Habib, *Akbar and the Temples of Mathurā*, p. 236. 
81.  Hawley, *A Storm of Songs*, p. 157. 
82.  Entwistle, *Braj Centre of Krishna Pilgrimage*, p. 160. 
83.  Mukherjee and Habib, *Akbar and the Temples of Mathurā*, p. 239. 
84.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 20. 
85.  Likely to be a reference to Vallabha’s son, Vitthalnath. 
86.  Mukherjee and Habib, *Akbar and the Temples of Mathurā*, p. 238. 
87.  For more on the achievements of Jīva Gosvāmī consult: Ravi M. Gupta, *The Caitanya Vaiṣṇava Vedānta of Jīva Gosvāmī* \(London, 2007\), p. 7. 
88.  Nityānanda, is considered an intimate associate of Caitanya and an avatar of Balarāma. 
89.  For more on this topic consult: Stewart, *Final word*, pp. 3–6. 
90.  Mukherjee and Habib, *Land Rights in the Reign of Akbar*, pp. 236–248. 
91.  Irfan Habib, *From Arith to Radhakund* \(New Delhi, 2011\), pp. 215–216. 
92.  Bahura, “Śrī Govinda Gāthā Service,” p. 201. 
93.  Azfar, *The Millennial Sovereign*, p. 166. 
94.  Azfar, *The Millennial Sovereign*, pp. 131–133. 
95.  Azfar, *The Millennial Sovereign*, p. 20. 
96.  Azfar, *The Millennial Sovereign*, p. 132. 
97.  Azfar, *The Millennial Sovereign*, p. 172. 
98.  Asher, * Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 100. 
99.  Pauwels, “A Tale of Two Temples,” p. 282. 
100.  Alam Muzaffar and Sanjay Subrahmanyam, *Writing the Mughal World* \(New York, 2012\), p. 129. 
101.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 90. 
102.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 76. 
103.  Jadunath Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 98. 
104.  Tarapada Mukherjee and Irfan Habib, *The Mughal Administration and the Temples of Vrindavan during the Reigns of Jahangir and Shahjahan* \(Dharwad, 1989\), p. 288. 
105.  Mukherjee and Habib, *The Mughal Administration*, p. 288. 
106.  Mukherjee and Habib, *The Mughal Administration*, p. 289. 
107.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 170. 
108.  Munis D. Faruqui, *The Princes of the Mughal Empire* \(New York, 2012\), p. 37. 
109.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 169. 
110.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 78. 
111.  Okita, *Hindu Theology*, pp. 24–25. 
112.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 99–111. 
113.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 246. 
114.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 170. 
115.  Saha Shandip, *Creating a Community of Grace* \(Ottawa, 2004\), p. 177. 
116.  Pauwels, “A Tale of Two Temples,” p. 156. 
117.  Catherine B. Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 246. 
118.  Catherine B. Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 246. 
119.  Mukherjee and Habib, *The Mughal Administration*, p. 289. 
120.  Mukherjee and Habib, *The Mughal Administration*, p. 289. 
121.  Mukherjee and Habib, *The Mughal Administration*, p. 290. 
122.  Mukherjee and Habib, *The Mughal Administration*, p. 290. 
123.  Mukherjee and Habib, *The Mughal Administration*, p. 290. 
124.  Irfan Habib, “Documentary History” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), p. 132. 
125.  Also known as Rādhā Kuṇḍa. 
126.  Habib, “Documentary History,” p. 148. 
127.  Mukherjee and Habib, *The Mughal Administration*, p. 291. 
128.  Faruqui, *The Princes of the Mughal Empire*, p. 38. 
129.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 252. 
130.  Audrey Truschke, *The Life and Legacy of India’s Most Controversial King* \(Stanford, 2017\), p. 41. 
131.  Nath, “Śrī Govinda’s Itinerary,” p. 163. 
132.  The Hindu nobles in general evenly supported both Dara and Aurangzeb. More Rājputs supported Dara, whereas more Marathas sided with Aurangzeb. Precisely 24 Hindu nobles sided with Dara and 21 nobles supported Aurangzeb \(Truschke, *India’s Most Controversial King*, p. 56\). 
133.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, pp. 81–83. 
134.  Sarkar, * A History of Jaipur*, pp. 118–121. 
135.  James Laine, *Shivaji: Hindu King in Islamic India* \(Oxford, 2003\), p. 4. 
136.  Laine, *Shivaji*, pp. 24–25. 
137.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 123–127. 
138.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 123–127. 
139.  Laine, *Shivaji*, p. 26. 
140.  Laine, *Shivaji*, p. 29. 
141.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 130–143. 
142.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 145–148. 
143.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, pp. 149–156. 
144.  Aurangzeb’s stance on the Hindu populace has been a point of contention. For example, Jadunath Sarkar states that Aurangzeb seized the opportunity presented by the death of the foremost Rājput ruler, Jaswantsingh, and Rāmsingh’s absence due to his assignment in Assam, and the general decline of Rājput influence in the Mughal regime. Thus, he issued orders to reinstate the *jizya* tax in 1679 and to reinvigorate the decree of 1669 to destroy “all temples and places of religious instruction of the Hindus” \(Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 148\). However, Aurangzeb’s anti-Hindu stance has been debated and a recent defence of this claim can be found in Audrey Truschke’s work on Aurangzeb. In the text, she presents numerous opposing points to counter this popular view. For instance, she argues that under Akbar, Hindus comprised 22.5% of all Mughal nobles in the administration. And in the first 21 years of Aurangzeb’s reign between 1658 and 1679 it remained at the level of 21.6%. However, between 1679 and 1707 the Hindu noble members increased by almost 50%, rising to 31.6% of the Mughal nobility. The dramatic rise is ascribed to the recruitment of Marathas as part of the expansion strategy in the Deccan \(Truschke, *India’s Most Controversial King*, p. 56\). Ali Athar also states that in the early period of Aurangzeb’s rule, he endeavoured to form alliances with the Rājput leaders, even rewarding them with *mansabs* up to 7000. However, later he seemed to be reluctant to promote the Rājputs and tried to reduce the Hindu nobles in the court. Nevertheless, in the second period the emperor was engaged in expanding the empire in the Deccan consequently he was forced to recruit “Deccanis,” which included Marathas who proved to be valuable in the Deccan wars. Aurangzeb had mixed successes with the Marathas who were far less reliable in their loyalty to the empire, in contrast to the Rājputs. In the second half of his rule, North India seems to have become less important than the South; hence even though the Hindu nobles increased in the administration, the Rājputs become less important, now outnumbered by the Marathas \(Athar, *The Mughal Nobility under Aurangzeb*, pp. 22–32\). 
145.  Habib, “Documentary History,” p. 148. 
146.  Saha, *Creating a Community of Grace*, p. 271. 
147.  This Mathurā temple site has become the focus of contention in recent times. Hindu groups such as the VHP \(Vishwa Hindu Parishad\) have petitioned for the mosque to be destroyed on the Kṛṣṇa Janmabhūmi site, in response to Aurangzeb’s destruction of the temple and replacement with a mosque. However, many scholars have endeavoured to explain that the motivations behind such destruction were not simply religiously in orientation. I have outlined some of the arguments in this chapter. \[For further scholarship on this subject consult Heidi Pauwels: Pauwels, “A Tale of Two Temples,” p. 147 and also see Richard Eaton, *Temple Desecration and Muslim States in Medieval India* \(Gurgaon, 2004\).\] 
148.  Nath, “Śrī Govinda’s Itinerary,” p. 163. 
149.  Nath, “Śrī Govinda’s Itinerary,” p. 163. 
150.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 254. 
151.  Pauwels, “A Tale of Two Temples,” p. 157. 
152.  During this period, the Viśvanātha temple was also demolished in 1669, which had been built by the Kachvāhā King Mānsingh. This has also been claimed to have been a response to Shivaji’s escape, coupled with the Benares landlords instigating a rebellion \(Truschke, *India’s Most Controversial King*, p. 84\). 
153.  Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 148. 
154.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 181. 
155.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 170. 
156.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 172. 
157.  Gosvāmī, “Lotus in Stone,” pp. 271–272. 
158.  John Burton-Page, “Hindu-Muslim Synthesis” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), p. 125. 
159.  Shrivatsa Gosvāmī, “Iconography of Govindadeva” in Margaret H. Case, Ed., *Govindadeva: A Dialogue in Stone* \(New Delhi, 1996\), pp. 69–70. 
160.  Nath, “Śrī Govinda’s Itinerary,” p. 164. 
161.  Asher, *Architecture of Mughal India*, p. 254. 
162.  Nath, “Śrī Govinda’s Itinerary,” pp. 168–169. 
163.  Bahura, “Śrī Govinda Gāthā Service,” p. 204. 
164.  Entwistle, *Braj Centre of Kṛṣṇa Pilgrimage*, p. 185. 
165.  Saha, *Creating a Community of Grace*, p. 103. 
166.  Stanley Wolpert, *A New History of India* \(Oxford, 2008\), p. 167. 
167.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, p. 98. 
168.  For instance, he utilised the political influence garnered in the Mughal courts to eradicate the *jizya* tax upon non-Muslim members of the empire. He accomplished this by persuading Muhammad Shah in 1720 to remove the tax; in addition, he was able to remove the tax inflicted on pilgrims to Gaya in 1728, and furthermore in 1730 he requested the emperor to remove the tax imposed on the Hindus who bathed in certain holy places \(Sarkar, *A History of Jaipur*, p. 225 and Entwistle, *Braj Centre of Krishna Pilgrimage*, p. 190\). Upon his request, the tax on Bhadar, a ritual among the Hindus when an elder member of the family died, was also eradicated \(Okita, *Hindu Theology*, p. 32\). 
169.  Chandra, *Mughal Religious Policies*, pp. 99–101. 
170.  Monika Horstmann, *In Favour of Govindadevji* \(New Delhi, 1999\), p. 17. 
171.  Fatima Ahmad Imam, *Institutionalizing Rajadharma* \(Toronto, 2008\), p. 11. 
172.  Nath, “Śrī Govinda’s Itinerary,” p. 180. 


