+++
title = "177"
+++
Bhakti Born of Natural Attraction Transcends
Virtue and Vice
१७७ । यस्मादेवं सर्वानन्दातिक्रमलिङ्गेन परमानन्दस्वरूपासौ भक्तिस्तस्मात् तत्र स्वभावत एव प्रवृत्तिर्गुणस्तथाभूतामपि तन्माधुरीं स्वदोषेणानुभवितुमसमर्थानां तु केवलविधिनिषेधसम्भवगुणदोषदृष्ट्यैव प्रवृत्तिरपि पूर्वापेक्षया दोष एव ।
BECAUSE this bhakti surpasses all other types of bliss (ananda), it is the embodiment of supreme bliss (paramānanda). There- fore, to engage in bhakti out of natural attraction (svabhāvata eva) is a virtue (guna). Although bhakti is truly of the nature of supreme bliss, some practitioners are unable to experience its sweetness due to their own defects. Such persons may engage in devotion only by weighing the consequences of merit and demerit (guna dosa ) based solely on the injunctions and prohi- bitions of scripture (vidhi- nisedha). To do so, however, is consid- ered a defect (dosa) in contrast to engagement in devotion out of natural attraction.
यथोक्तमेतत् पूर्वाध्याये “शमो मन्निष्ठताबुद्धेः” (भा० ११ १९ । ३६) इत्यादौ साक्षाद्भक्तेरपि विधानाविधानयोर्गुणदोषताम् " किं वर्णितेन बहुना” (भा० ११।१९।४५) इत्यन्तेन ग्रन्थेन प्रतिपाद्य “गुणदोषदृशिर्दोषो गुणस्तूभयवर्जितः” (भा० ११ । १९।४५) इति लब्धतन्माधुर्या- नुभवानां तद्विधिनिषेधकृतगुणदोषौ नस्त एवेत्याह (भा० ११ १२० १३६) -
As Śrī Kṛṣṇa said in the previous chapter of Srimad Bhāga- vata, “Sama, or ‘unwavering mental tranquility,' is fixity of the
1069I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
intellect on Me" (SB 11.19.36)! In this and the subsequent state- ments, the ordained engagement in direct bhakti is a virtue (guna), whereas neglecting to do so is a defect (dosa). Krsna con- cludes His discussion on virtues and defects with the following
statement:
O Uddhava, these questions of yours have all been suitably answered. What need is there for further elaboration? The definitive characteristic of virtue and defect may be summed up as follows: to distinguish virtues and faults (guna-dosa) is itself a defect (dosa), whereas to be free from the perception of both is real virtue (guna). (SB 11.19.45)2
In accordance with this teaching, those who have tasted the sweetness (madhurya) of devotion are free from the virtues and defects (guna-dosa) associated with the injunctions and prohibi- tions of scripture (vidhi-niṣedha). These devotees are described by Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa as follows:
न मय्येकान्तभक्तानां गुणदोषोद्भवा गुणाः । साधूनां समचित्तानां बुद्धेः परमुपेयुषाम् || ५१३ ||
Those who are established in authentic being (sādhūnām), who are thus equally disposed to all phenomenal uprisings (sama-cittānām), who have attained the transcendence [Iśvara] beyond the scope of intellection (buddheḥ param upeyuṣām), and
1 samo man-nisthata buddheh
Σ
In SB 11.19.28-32, Uddhava asks Krsna a series of questions, including, "What is sama?" In particular, in the last three of these verses (SB 11.19.30-32), the things he inquires about would typically be regarded either as virtues (guna) or their opposite, i.e., defects (dosa), although he doesn't explicitly use these terms. Krsna answers these questions in order in SB 11.19.33-45. It is only in the final verse in this series that He uses the terms guna and dosa, referring everything just said back to this twofold classification. According to this understanding, sama, which Kṛṣṇa equates with bhakti (i.e., "fixity of the intellect on Him"), is understood as a virtue, whereas its opposite is a defect. This is the point being made here. Bhakti is also directly mentioned in this list in SB 11.19.40.
eta uddhava te prasnaḥ sarve sädhu nirupitāḥ kim varṇitena bahuna lakṣaṇam guna-dosayoh guna-dosa-drsir doso gunas tubhaya-varjitah
1070
177 Bhakti Born of Natural Attraction Transcends Virtue and Vice
who are exclusively devoted to Me, have no attributes (gunas) arising out of virtue and vice (guna-dosa). (SB 11.20.36)3
टीकाच - " गुणदोषैर्विहितप्रतिषिद्वैरुद्भवो येषां ते गुणाः पुण्यपापादयः" इत्येषा ॥ श्री- भगवान् ॥
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments: "In this verse, the word guṇaḥ, 'attributes,' refers to the piety and sin (punya-papa) that arise from virtue and vice (guna-dosa), or in other words, from [obeying] the prescriptions and [ignoring] the prohibitions of scripture."
Commentary
JIVA GOSVĀMI has been gradually building his argument to illus- trate the splendor of bhakti. It is as though bhakti were a glitter- ing diamond that was covered with mud, sullied, and unpolished, amidst a pile of other stones that seem more colorful and attrac- tive. He has cleared away the dirt, and now he begins polishing the diamond.
In this anuccheda, Śrī Jīva makes the point that bhakti is the most natural engagement for us to participate in. Why is that? Because we are all looking for peace and happiness unmixed with any suf- fering. This is our most basic and primary desire. In this matter, we are all equal, and we can drop all our differences. In other respects, our differences are apparent, and we find ourselves in competi- tion for the objects of our desire. By its very nature, bhakti is bliss and awareness. It bestows a quality of bliss that has no compari- son to any experience of happiness that we have ever had. There- fore, engaging in bhakti is the most natural thing for a living being. There is no injunction required for it.
When a person is dying from starvation, he does not need to be given an order to eat. He will do so willingly and happily with great enthusiasm and feel great bliss. In fact, if someone were to
3
na mayy ekanta-bhaktānām guna-dosodbhavā gunah
sādhūnām sama-cittānām buddheḥ param upeyuṣām
1071
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
try to stop him, he would even resort to fighting to get at the food. If such is the case with mere bodily or physical nourishment, then why doesn't everyone take to bhakti, which is nourishment for the heart, mind, and soul? Why does sastra need to enjoin it?
We are all suffering in different ways; everyone is starving for want of peace and happiness. We should naturally become absorbed in bhakti, the very nature of which is peace and supreme bliss, as Krsna informs Uddhava, "Mental peace (sama) is fixity of the intellect on Me" (SB 11.19.36). If the mind is absorbed in Krsna, it cannot be disturbed, because it is not available for disturbance. It is natural for the mind to become absorbed in Kṛṣṇa, because the mind is attracted to beauty and pleasure. Kṛṣṇa is beauty and bliss personified. Therefore, peace and happiness are concomitant effects of bhakti.
In spite of bhakti's being of such nature, however, people still do not take to it for the simple reason that they are in a diseased condition. If a person is sick with jaundice or a high fever, then he or she feels no appetite, even though the body is in need of nour- ishment. In the same manner, people are not attracted to bhakti because of the ignorance that bewilders their intelligence and the offenses that make them immune to the experience of bhakti's bliss- ful nature. To address this condition, sastra mercifully ordains the practice of bhakti, just as a qualified physician instructs a sick patient to adopt a wholesome diet.
This bhakti, however, which is taken up on the basis of scrip- tural injunctions, is known as vaidhi-bhakti. Such formal devo- tion is not undertaken with the same enthusiasm and absorption as when bhakti is performed out of natural attraction, known as rāgānuga-bhakti. A sick person, who eats only on the doctor's order, will not eat with the same gusto and absorption as a healthy person who is genuinely hungry. On this basis, Jīva Gosvāmi boldly asserts that in comparison to bhakti impelled by natural attraction, engage- ment in devotion merely on the basis of śästrika injunctions is a defect (dosa). To speak of vaidhi-bhakti as defective here means that such practice is comparatively weaker and not that it is otherwise devoid of inherent value.
1072
177 Bhakti Born of Natural Attraction Transcends Virtue and Vice
One may question how Krsna's statement, "Sama, or 'unwaver- ing mental tranquility,' is fixity of the intellect on Me" (SB 11.19.36), brings bhakti under the purview of the scriptural injunctions and prohibitions, and as a consequence, of virtue and vice? The answer is that scriptural injunctions are concerned with engaging people in pious acts, which result in peace and happiness, and with pre- venting their involvement in immoral acts, which result in distur- bance and suffering. Since peace of mind (sama) is defined as fix- ity of the intellect on Krsna, it naturally follows that one should engage in bhakti and that this is a virtue. Action contrary to this is prohibited, it being a vice.
Although there is no direct injunction in Kṛṣṇa's statement, it is implied. This is called a siddhopadeśa. If a reliable and authoritative person informs you that there is a treasure hidden in your back- yard, there is no need to lay down an injunction for you to go and unearth it. Implicit within the declaration itself is the imperative to do so.
The divisions of virtue and vice in regard to bhakti, however, are different from those that apply in the field of karma. Devo- tees are beyond the purview of virtue and vice as defined on the path of karma, which are based respectively on the injunctions and prohibitions given in sastra. This is because devotees do not have attributes arising from material nature, constituted of sattva, rajas, and tamas. Their qualities manifest from bhakti and are beyond the gunas of nature, even though they may appear material.
1073
