+++
title = "43"

+++


43. And on account of contradiction.

The origination of the jīva is, moreover, distinctly controverted in the books of the Bhāgavatas also. Thus in the Parama-saṁhitā 'The nature of Prakr̥ti consists therein that she is non-sentient, for the sake of another, eternal, ever-changing, comprising within herself the three guṇas. and constituting the sphere of action and experience for all agents. With her the soul (purusha) is connected in the way of inseparable association; that soul is known to be truly without beginning and without end.' And as all Saṁhitas make similar statements as to the eternity of the soul, the Pañcarātra doctrine manifestly controverts the view of the essential nature of the jiva being something that originates. How it is possible that in the Veda as well as in common life the soul is spoken of as being born, dying, &c., will be explained under Sū. II, 3, 17. The conclusion, therefore, is that the Bhāgavata system also denies the origination of the soul, and that hence the objections raised on this ground against its authoritativeness are without any force. Another objection is raised by some. Sāṇḍilya, they argue, is said to have promulgated the Pañcarātra doctrine because he did not find a sure basis for the highest welfare of man in the Veda and its auxiliary disciplines, and this implies that the Pañcarātra is opposed to the Veda.--his objection, we reply, springs from nothing else but the mere unreasoning faith of men who do not possess the faintest knowledge

of the teachings of the Veda, and have never considered the hosts of arguments which confirm that teaching. When the Veda says, 'Morning after morning those speak untruth who make the Agnihotra offering before sunrise,' it is understood that the censure there passed on the offering before sunrise is really meant to glorify the offering after sunrise. We meet with a similar case in the 'bhūma-vidyā' (Cḥ. Up. VII, 2). There at the beginning Nārada says, 'I know the R̥g-veda, the Yajur-veda, the Sāma-veda, the Ātharvaṇa as the fourth, the Itihāsa-purāṇa as the fifth,' and so on, enumerating all the various branches of knowledge, and finally summing up 'with all this I know the mantras only, I do not know the Self.' Now this declaration of the knowledge of the Self not being attainable through any branch of knowledge except the knowledge of the Bhūman evidently has no other purpose but to glorify this latter knowledge, which is about to be expounded. Or else Nārada's words refer to the fact that from the Veda and its auxiliary disciplines he had not obtained the knowledge of the highest Reality. Analogous to this is the case of Sāṇḍilya's alleged objection to the Veda. That the Bhāgavata doctrine is meant to facilitate the understanding of the sense of the Veda which by itself is difficult of comprehension, is declared in the Paramasaṁhita,'I have read the Vedas at length, together with all the various auxiliary branches of knowledge. But in all these I cannot see a clear indication, raised above all doubt, of the way to blessedness, whereby I might reach perfection'; and 'The wise Lord Hari, animated by kindness for those devoted to him, extracted the essential meaning of all the Vedānta-texts and condensed it in an easy form.' The incontrovertible fact then is as follows. The Lord who is known from the Vedānta-texts, i.e. Vāsudeva, called there the highest Brahman--who is antagonistic to all evil, whose nature is of uniform excellence, who is an ocean, as it were, of unlimited exalted qualities, such as infinite intelligence, bliss, and so on, all whose purposes come true--perceiving that those devoted to him, according as they are differently placed in the four castes and the

four stages of life, are intent on the different ends of life, viz. religious observances, wealth, pleasure, and final release; and recognising that the Vedas--which teach the truth about his own nature, his glorious manifestations, the means of rendering him propitious and the fruits of such endeavour--are difficult to fathom by all beings other than himself, whether gods or men, since those Vedas are divided into R̥k, Yajus, Sāman, and Atharvan; and being animated by infinite pity, tenderness, and magnanimity; with a view to enable his devotees to grasp the true meaning of the Vedas, himself composed the Pañcarātra-śāstra. The author of the Sūtras (Vyāsa)--who first composed the Sūtras, the purport of which it is to set forth the arguments establishing the Vedānta doctrine, and then the Bhārata-saṁhitā (i.e. the Mahābhārata) in a hundred thousand ślokas in order to support thereby the teaching of the Veda--himself says in the chapter called Mokshadharma, which treats of knowledge, 'If a householder, or a Brahmacārin, or a hermit, or a mendicant wishes to achieve success, what deity should he worship?' and so on; explains then at great length the Pañcarātra system, and then says, 'From the lengthy Bhārata story, comprising one hundred thousand ślokas, this body of doctrine has been extracted, with the churning-staff of mind, as butter is churned from curds--as butter from milk, as the Brahmaṇa from men, as the Āraṇyaka from the Vedas, as Amr̥ta from medicinal herbs.--This great Upanishad, consistent with the four Vedas, in harmony with Sānkhya and Yoga, was called by him by the name of Pañcarātra. This is excellent, this is Brahman, this is supremely beneficial. Fully agreeing with the R̥k, the Yajus, the Sāman, and the Atharvān-giras, this doctrine will be truly authoritative.' The terms Sānkhya and Yoga here denote the concentrated application of knowledge and of works. As has been said, 'By the application of knowledge on the part of the Sānkhya, and of works on the part of the Yogins.' And in the Bhīshmaparvan we read, 'By Brahmaṇas, Kshattriyas, Vaiśyas and Śūdras, Mādhava is to be honoured, served and worshipped--he who was proclaimed by Sankarshaṇa

in agreement with the Sātvata law.'--How then could these utterances of Bādarāyaṇa, the foremost among all those who understand the teaching of the Veda, be reconciled with the view that in the Sūtras he maintains the non-authoritativeness of the Sātvata doctrine, the purport of which is to teach the worship of, and meditation on, Vāsudeva, who is none other than the highest Brahman known from the Vedānta-texts?

But other passages in the Mahābhārata, such as 'There is the Sānkhya, the Yoga, the Pañcarātra, the Vedas, and the Paśupata doctrine; do all these rest on one and the same basis, or on different ones?' and so on, declare that the Sānkhya and other doctrines also are worthy of regard, while yet in the Śārīraka Sūtras those very same doctrines are formally refuted. Why, therefore, should not the same hold good in the case of the Bhāgavata doctrine?--Not so, we reply. In the Mahābhārata also Bādarayaṇa applies to the Sānkhya and other doctrines the same style of reasoning as in the Sūtras. The question, asked in the passage quoted, means 'Do the Sānkhya, the Yoga, the Paśupata, and the Pañcarātra set forth one and the same reality, or different ones? If the former, what is that reality? If the latter, they convey contradictory doctrines, and, as reality is not something which may be optionally assumed to be either such or such, one of those doctrines only can be acknowledged as authoritative, and the question then arises which is to be so acknowledged?'--The answer to the question is given in the passage beginning, 'Know, O royal Sage, all those different views. The promulgator of the Sānkhya is Kapila,' &c. Here the human origin of the Sānkhya, Yoga, and Pāśupata is established on the ground of their having been produced by Kapila, Hiraṇyagarbha, and Paśupati. Next the clause 'Aparāntatamas is said to be the teacher of the Vedas' intimates the non-human character of the Vedas; and finally the clause 'Of the whole Pañcarātra, Nārāyaṇa himself is the promulgator' declares that Nārāyaṇa himself revealed the Pañcarātra doctrine. The connected purport of these different clauses is as follows. As the systems

of human origin set forth doctrines mutually contradictory, and, moreover, teach what is in conflict with the matter known from the Veda--which, on account of its non-human character, is raised above all suspicion of error and other imperfections--they cannot be accepted as authoritative with regard to anything not depending on human action and choice. Now the matter to be known from the Veda is Nārāyaṇa, who is none other than the highest Brahman. It hence follows that the entities set forth in those different systems--the pradhāna, the soul (purusha), Paśupati, and so on--have to be viewed as real only in so far as Nārāyaṇa, i.e. the highest Brahman, as known from the Vedānta-texts, constitutes their Self. This the text directly declares in the passage, 'In all those doctrines it is seen, in accordance with tradition and reasoning, that the lord Narayawa is the only basis.' This means--'To him who considers the entities set forth in those systems with the help of argumentation, it is evident that Nārāyaṇa alone is the basis of all those entities.' In other words, as the entities set forth in those systems are not Brahman, any one who remembers the teaching of texts such as 'all this indeed is Brahman,' 'Nārāyaṇa is all,' which declare Brahman to be the Self of all, comes to the conclusion that Nārāyaṇa alone is the basis of those entities. As thus it is settled that the highest Brahman, as known from the Vedānta-texts, or Nārāyaṇa, himself is the promulgator of the entire Pañcarātra, and that this system teaches the nature of Nārāyaṇa and the proper way of worshipping him, none can disestablish the view that in the Pañcarātra all the other doctrines are comprised. For this reason the Mahābhārata says, 'Thus the Sānkhya-yoga and the Veda and the Āraṇyaka, being members of one another, are called the Pañcarātra,' i.e. the Sānkhya, the Yoga, the Vedas, and the Āraṇyakas, which are members of one another because they are one in so far as aiming at setting forth one Truth, together are called the Pañcarātra.--The Sānkhya explains the twenty-five principles, the Yoga teaches certain practices and means of mental concentration, and the Āraṇyakas teach that all the subordinate

principles have their true Self in Brahman, that the mental concentration enjoined in the Yoga is a mode of meditation on Brahman, and that the rites and works which are set forth in the Veda are means to win the favour of Brahman--thus giving instruction as to Brahman's nature. Now all these elements, in their inward connexion, are clearly set forth in the Pañcarātra by the highest Brahman, i.e. Nārāyaṇa, himself. The Śārīraka Śāstra (i.e. the Vedānta) does not disprove the principles assumed by the Sānkhyas, but merely the view of their not having Brahman for their Self; and similarly in its criticism on the Yoga and Pāśupata systems, it merely refutes the view of the Lord being a mere instrumental cause, the erroneous assumptions as to the relative position of higher and lower entities, and certain practices not warranted by the Veda; but it does not reject the Yoga itself, nor again the lord Pāśupati. Hence Smr̥ti says,' The Sānkhya, the Yoga, the Pañcarātra, the Vedas, and the Pśupata doctrine--all these having their proof in the Self may not be destroyed by arguments.' The essential points in all these doctrines are to be adopted, not to be rejected absolutely as the teaching of Jina. or Sugata is to be rejected. For, as said in the Smr̥ti text quoted above, in all those doctrines it is seen, according to tradition and reasoning, that the lord Nārāyaṇa is the only basis.'--Here terminates the adhikaraṇa of 'the impossibility of origination.'

