+++
title = "1 i \\) What became of the Āgamasiddhāntins?: A short summary"

+++

I have argued in the first three chapters that the idea of the supremacy of the JS, SS and PauṣS appears to have emerged, probably no earlier than the twelfth century, within the South Indian Pāñcarātra tradition which called itself the Āgamasiddhānta. 

This tradition associated itself with the so-called Ekāyanaveda, an apparently mythical Urtext which in reality may have been represented by the *Jayākhyasaṃhitā* \(JS\), *Sātvatasaṃhitā *\(SS\) and *Pauṣkarasaṃhitā *\(PauṣS\). This is suggested, at least, by the *Śrīpraśnasaṃhitā *\(ŚrīprśS 49.471c-473\), and by the much later commentator Alaśiṅgabhaṭṭa in his *Sātvatārthaprakāśikā *\(on *Īśvarasaṃhitā* 1.64-67\). The idea of there being four Pāñcarātra Siddhāntas may also have emerged among Āgamasiddhāntins or Ekāyanas, since its earliest articulation is probably that found in the PauṣS \(38.293-307b\), and the majority of extant lists of the four Siddhāntas name the Āgamasiddhānta as the highest of the four. 

As we have seen, the supremacy of the JS, SS and PauṣS is also claimed in the ŚrīprśS, and in the interpolated section of the JS entitled *Adhikaḥ Pāṭhaḥ*, both of which were very likely authored by non-Āgamasiddhānta Pāñcarātrikas. In addition, several non-Āgamasiddhānta scriptural sources contain the claim that there are four Pāñcarātra Siddhāntas, though inevitably in these instances the authors place their own tradition, namely the Mantrasiddhānta, at the top of the hierarchy. What is more, the idea of the Ekāyanaveda is itself found in several non-Āgamasiddhānta scriptural sources, such as the *Pādmasaṃhitā *\(PādS *cp* 13.66c-72b\), the ŚrīprśS \(e.g. 16.20\) and the *Śrīpuruṣottamasaṃhitā *\(ŚrīpurS 1.12\). On these occasions, however, the term ‘Ekāyana’ refers to the Pāñcarātra tradition in general, rather than to the Āgamasiddhānta. 

Among the published works available to me, the vast majority were authored by non-Āgamasiddhānta Pāñcarātrikas. As I have shown in Chapter Four, the authors 229 of these works were generally increasingly keen to stress the continuity of their own practices with those legitimated by Brahminical orthodoxy, though at the same time they continued to advertise their ritual expertise to a wider social audience than was acceptable to those who upheld that orthodoxy. Of the works at my disposal, only the *Pārameśvarasaṃhitā *\(PārS\) and the *Īśvarasaṃhitā* \(ĪS\), together with parts of the PauṣS and the SS, were clearly authored by Āgamasiddhāntins or Ekāyanas. The parts of the PauṣS and the SS that appear to have been authored by Ekāyanas \(the term ‘Āgamasiddhānta’ is not found in these works\) were probably added to these texts in South India. Some of these sections of the PauṣS articulate a clearly sectarian agenda, condemning the practices of non-Ekāyana Pāñcarātrikas and even questioning their status as genuine devotees. However, in other interpolated sections of the PauṣS, as we have seen in Chapter Eight, Ekāyana authors appear to sanction these very same practices. 

We have here, then, rather a complex history. There are numerous sources, as I have shown in Chapter Two, which indicate that there were always distinct groups within the Pāñcarātra. This is not especially surprising in view of the fact that the *Nārāyaṇīya*, which contains the earliest extant references to a religious tradition called ‘Pañcarātra’, presents this tradition as, from the outset, a synthesis of previously distinct religious identities and soteriological methods. However, there is no evidence prior to sources such as the PauṣS, the PādS and the PārS, that these distinct groups were in direct competition with one another for the control of temples, and that in consequence of this, were mutually opposed. This happened, I believe, in a relatively “orthodox” South Indian environment wherein those Pāñcarātrikas who could claim association, through membership of a *gotra*, with the Vedic tradition, were at a distinct advantage over those Pāñcarātrikas who could not. 

As I have argued in Chapter Five, the origin of the tradition of the Ekāyanaveda is probably best explained in reference to this environment. 

The Āgamasiddhāntins who associated themselves with the Ekāyanaveda appear to have congregated in relatively small Vaiṣṇava centres such as Śrīraṅgam and Melkote. Based on the relative size of their literary output, we must assume that they represented a minority within the Pāñcarātra. Nonetheless, they appear to have [[230]] had a certain authority in the Pāñcarātra tradition. This is evident from the fact that apparently Āgamasiddhāntin ideas, such as the supremacy of the JS, SS, and PauṣS, and the existence of the Ekāyanaveda, found their way into non-Āgamasiddhānta scriptures. It is also evident, as we will see shortly, from the descriptions of the Āgamasiddhānta in Vedāntadeśika’s *Pāñcarātrarakṣā *\(PRR\). 

Among the Pāñcarātra scriptural works which probably postdate Vedāntadeśika, only the ĪS, which incorporates a large amount of material from the PārS, seems to have been authored by Āgamasiddhāntins. In many of these late works, the Pāñcarātra is presented as a single system \( *tantra*\), and there is no mention of the distinct traditions or Siddhāntas. Several of these works, as we have seen in Chapter Three, contain extensive, non-hierarchical lists of the Pāñcarātra Saṃhitās. Thus, it appears that the culture of sectarianism within the Pāñcarātra subsided, and was replaced by one in which the non-Āgamasiddhānta Pāñcarātrikas represented the tradition as a single integrated system. 

What, then, became of the Āgamasiddhāntins? In this short chapter, I address several passages from Vedāntadeśika’s PRR which may provide some clues to the answer to this question. 
