+++
title = "3 iii \\) Conclusions"

+++

Vedāntadeśika’s defence of the Āgamasiddhānta appears to indicate that this tradition was especially subject to external criticism. This criticism may have come from within the Vaikhānasa tradition. We know that Vaikhānasas were present in Śrīraṅgam. In my view it is unlikely, however, that criticism from this source would have had a significant impact on the decline of the Āgamasiddhānta. If I am correct in proposing that the Āgamasiddhānta was integrated into other Pāñcarātra traditions, then an important question remains. Why did this happen? Why, for example, did it not happen the other way round? The fact that Āgamasiddhāntins appear to have been a minority within the South Indian Pāñcarātra may have been a partial cause of the direction that this integrative process appears to have taken, but it is not an explanation. Why, then, were Āgamasiddhāntins a minority? 

238 

The obvious answer to this question is one that I have mentioned already. Non-Āgamasiddhāntin Pāñcarātrikas held a distinct advantage over Āgamasiddhāntins in that they claimed membership within a genuine Vedic *śākhā*. It is quite likely, as we have seen in Chapter Five, that some South Indian Pāñcarātrikas did genuinely come from orthodox Brahminical backgrounds. Yāmuna, recall, was prepared to vouch for the fact that the Pāñcarātrika Bhāgavatas belonged to the Vājasaneyaśākhā. Of course, Yāmuna also claims that the Ekāyanas belong to a Vedic *śākhā*. However, owing to the fact that there was no record of such a Vedic school, it is considerably less likely that this claim would have been accepted by outsiders. Undoubtedly, if non-Āgamasiddhāntins could persuasively affiliate themselves with Vedic tradition, this would have made them more attractive in the eyes of prospective patrons. Moreover, in a commercially competitive environment wherein the ritual expertise of professional priests would have been shaped to a great extent by the needs of their clients, the Ekāyanas had given themselves a distinct disadvantage. For they could not promise these clients, as reward for loyalty and generous support, the attainment of liberation at death. The best they could offer them, soteriologically speaking, was rebirth as an Ekāyana. 

239 

240 

CONCLUSIONS 

I will conclude with a historically chronological summary of the findings of this thesis. I have shown that the earliest textual source which refers to a ‘Pañcarātra’ 

tradition, namely the *Nārāyaṇīya* section of the *Mahābhārata*, datable in its present form to the fourth or fifth century CE, presents the emergence of this tradition as the outcome of a process whereby previously distinct religious identities and soteriological methods were assimilated and subordinated to a devotional religion centred on Nārāyaṇa \(Chapter Seven\). Several centuries subsequent to the composition of the *Nārāyaṇīya*, numerous textual sources attest to there being distinct groups either “within” or related to a loosely organised Pāñcarātra tradition. 

These sources include a number of Pāñcarātra Saṃhitās dating from the ninth to eleventh centuries, in particular the *Sātvatasaṃhitā*, the *Jayākhyasaṃhitā*, the *Pauṣkarasaṃhitā* and the *Sanatkumārasaṃhitā*, in addition to several works external to the Pāñcarātra scriptural corpus. Among the latter we can count Rājānaka Ratnākara’s ninth century *Haravijaya* and Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭha’s tenth century *Nareśvaraparīkṣāprakāśa*, both produced in Kashmir, as well as South Indian texts such as the ninth-tenth century Vaikhānasa *Samūrtārcanādhikaraṇa*, and Yāmuna’s eleventh-twelfth century *Āgamaprāmāṇya*. In these works, Pāñcarātra groups are distinguished from each other by a variety of means including philosophical doctrine, soteriology, ritual practice, social class, mode of living, and religious symbol. There is little consistency in the accounts of different Pāñcarātra groups before the late eleventh or early twelfth century, at which time a number of descriptions of four Pāñcarātra ‘Siddhāntas’ appear in several South Indian scriptural works. Some of these works, most notably the *Pādmasaṃhitā* and the *Pārameśvarasaṃhitā*, point to there being, during this period, a sectarian animosity between two Pāñcarātra Siddhāntas in particular. These two Siddhāntas primarily distinguished themselves from one another on the basis of their scriptural allegiance \(Chapter Two\). The more textually prolific of these groups called itself ‘Mantrasiddhānta’ and claimed that its teachings were “rooted in the Veda” \( *vedamūlatā*\). The textual evidence suggests that this tradition was increasingly concerned with presenting itself as conforming to 241 

orthodox norms, though it continued to address itself to a wider social audience than was acceptable to those who maintained those norms \(Chapter Four\). Authors belonging to the less textually prolific tradition, called ‘Āgamasiddhānta’, made the claim that their scriptures are rooted in an original teaching called ‘Ekāyanaveda’. 

The identity of this Ekāyanaveda is uncertain, though a later scriptural work, namely the \(probably fourteenth century\) *Śrīpraśnasaṃhitā*, assumes it to have been a collective label for the *Jayākhyasaṃhitā*, *Sātvatasaṃhitā* and *Pauṣkarasaṃhitā*. The twelfth-thirteenth century *Pārameśvarasaṃhitā* and the thirteenth-fourteenth century *Īśvarasaṃhitā*, both of which claim affiliation with the Ekāyanaveda, interpret *ekāyana* as meaning “the only way” \(i.e. to liberation\), though this is very likely a significant revision of the original sense of this term. 

According to Mantrasiddhānta authors, members of the Āgamasiddhānta were not qualified to act as professional temple priests performing rituals on behalf of others, though Āgamasiddhāntins disputed this. Such disagreements point to the likelihood that these two Pāñcarātra traditions were in competition with each other for the control of temples in South India, a theory which also finds support in other textual passages \(Chapter Five\). However, this period of sectarian animosity, which was probably current for a period during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, did not last long, and the main reason for this appears to have been that the Āgamasiddhāntins or Ekāyanas could not compete effectively with their more orthodox rivals. This was, no doubt, primarily due to the fact that they could not claim affiliation with a genuine Vedic school \( *śākhā*\), and in the Śrīvaiṣṇava-influenced orthodox religious environment of South India at this time were therefore less attractive than the Mantrasiddhāntins in the eyes of prospective patrons. 

However, another cause of the inability of Āgamasiddhāntins to compete effectively with their rivals may well have been self-inflicted. I refer here to the Āgamasiddhāntins’ understanding of their own tradition as one in which membership is conferred by birth rather than initiation. This meant that since the Āgamasiddhānta was, in their way of thinking, “the only way” to liberation \( *mokṣa*\), Āgamasiddhāntins could not promise the achievement of this goal to prospective patrons from outside their own tradition – they could only offer them the promise of 242 

a rebirth within the Āgamasiddhānta. In this respect the Mantrasiddhāntins held a distinct advantage since, for them, the ritual of initiation \( *dīkṣā*\) was enough to establish the patron’s eligibility to achieve liberation at death. 

An apparent consequence of the greater resources available to the Mantrasiddhānta in their efforts to attract royal patronage was that some members of the Āgamasiddhānta began to incorporate into their repertoire the same ritual practices that their Mantrasiddhāntin rivals engaged in – practices that their own tradition \(i.e. the Āgamasiddhānta\) had previously condemned \(Chapters Eight to Nine\). These included rituals granting rewards to those desirous of the “fruits” of worship \( *phalārthin*\), as well as acts of “mixed worship” such as the worship of Viṣṇu’s subordinate deities. By these means, the religious identities of these two Pāñcarātra traditions began to merge. This gave rise to a culture which made a concerted effort to integrate the distinct Pāñcarātra traditions. One of the outcomes of this process, or a means by which it occurred, was the formation of the Pāñcarātra scriptural canon, a project which appears to have been especially important to the composers and redactors of the Saṃhitās during the fourteenth century \(Chapters One and Three\). 

Insofar as is possible, I have attempted to locate Pāñcarātra texts within the sociohistorical context summarised here, though it is clearly the case that not all such works can be located there. I refer here in particular to the *Ahirbudhnyasaṃhitā* and the *Lakṣmītantra*, neither of which appear to belong to the “sectarian” Pāñcarātra culture within which many of the extant South Indian Saṃhitās were produced \(Chapter Six\). Moreover, several texts appear to have been composed by members of distinct Pāñcarātra traditions, and thus do not belong in their entirety to one *milieu* or another. Thus, it is clear that portions of the *Pauṣkarasaṃhitā* were authored by Ekāyanas, while other sections of this text were authored by other types of Pāñcarātrika. Naturally, without paleographical support, any attempt to distinguish between the historical layers of a text remains speculative, and any conclusions arrived at must be tentative and open to revision. This is the position I take on my own comments on the historical layers of the *Pauṣkarasaṃhitā*, a text which in its 243 

present corrupt and fragmentary form can invite only tentative judgements, as well as on material I identify as having been interpolated into other texts. 

244 