+++
title = "03 Pallavas"
+++

The area then passed under the Pallavas, who are divided into the Pallavas  of the Prakrit charters, the Pallavas of the Sanskrit charters and the Greater Pallavas. In the time of Skandavarman of the Prakrit charters, the kingdom  extended up to the river Krishna in the north and the Arabian Sea in the west. The  territory, comprising the present Chittoor district, passed out of their control  in the middle of the 4th century A.D., when the Gupta ruler, Samudragupta,  invaded the south and defeated the Pallava ruler, Vishnugopa of Kanchi.  Though the Pallava hegemony was re-established, the dominions were once  again lost to Karikala Chola during the time of Trilochana Pallava. The  Pallava overlordship over this region was established by Simhavishnu who  ruled the kingdom between A.D. 560 and A.D. 580. A major portion of  this district, situated in the north west of the Pallava  kingdom bordering  the Chalukyan territories, was poised directly between two rival powers,  the Pallavas and the Chalukyas of Badami. Mahendravarman I (AD 580-630), however, lost much of his northern territory to the Western Chalukya  ruler Pulakesi II. The Pallava rule over this district was, however, resuscitated  by Narasimhavarman I (A.D. 630-668). His successors held sway over this  area till the end. This is evident from a number of inscriptions pertaining  to the Pallava rulers such as Narasimhavarman II (A.D. 700-728), Paramesvara varman II (A,D, 728-731), Nandivarman II (A.D. 731-796), Dantivarman  (A.D. 796-847), Nandivarman III (A.D. 846-869), Nripatungavannan (A.D.  859-899) and Aparajita (A.D. 885-903), found in this district.  

The age of the Pallavas constitutes the first important landmark in the  history of Tondaimandalam and the Tirumala-Tirupati region which was  included in it. These Pallavas were originally the inhabitants of the south-eastern part of the Satavahana empire, bordering upon Tondamandalam,  The founder and first ruler of this dynasty, Simhavarman alias Virakurcha,  married a Naga princess from the kingdom of Vanavasi and inherited a kingdom  and royal status through his wife. As the son-in-law of the most powerful  Naga family of the time, he might have been easily recognised as the leader  by the other Naga tribes inhabiting Tondamandalam. He then invaded  the coastal region, brought about the end of Ikshvaku rule and annexed  the Guntur and Nellore districts and the districts of Rayalasima. He revived  the old glory of the city of Kanchi by making it his capital. This vast kingdom founded by him flourished for a long time and was ruled over by his successors  till the end of the ninth century A.D. It was then conquered by the Cholas.  

There are two records [^1](219 and 223 G.T.) of the first of the last three rulers  of the Pallava dynasty in this region. This King is mentioned as Ko-Vijaya-Dantivikramar and is identified with Dantivarman (775-826 A.D.). These  inscriptions contain gifts made not to the temple on Vengadam but to a proxy  or representative temple and its god, situated in Tiruchanur.  

This area was included in the fief of the Banas, a family of Pallava  feudatories. A Bana Vijayaditya figures in two inscriptions (429 and 229 G.T.).  This Vijayaditya seems to have flourished in the early half of the ninth century  A. D. After two more generations of Pallava kings, the Chola king,  Aditya I, invaded Tondamandalam, defeated its Pallava king, Aparajita,  and conquered it. Thus ended Pallava rule over this region.  

