+++
title = "05 Rashtrakutas"
+++

The Chalukyas of Badami were overthrown in A.D. 757 by their  feudatories, the Rashtrakutas. Towards the close of the ninth century A.D.,  the Pallavas themselves had to contend with the rising power of the Pandyas.  The Rashtrakutas seem to have actively assisted them, at least for some time,  in their struggle against the Pandyas. Another new power, the Imperial  Cholas, emerged about this period in South India. These dynasties were  destined to exert considerable influence over Chittoor district. Their  feudatories, like the Banas, the Nolambas, the Western Gangas and the  Vaidumbas, were entangled in the wars of these paramount powers and Chittoor  district passed through fairly exciting times with the changing fortunes of the  kingdoms and principalities of all these rulers.

The Pallava rule, however, came to an end in this district with the overthrow of the Pallava ruler Aparajita by the Chola ruler Aditya I (A.D. 871-907)  and the annexation to the Chola kingdom of Tondaimandalam, which included  this district. Before his death near Sri Kalahasti in the district,  Aditya I conquered large territories and annexed them to his kingdom. Thus,  at the accession of his son, Parantaka I (A.D. 907-955), the Chola kingdom  embraced the whole country between Srikalahasti and Madras in the north,  and the Kaveri in the south. Parantaka I defeated between A.D. 909 and  A.D. 916 the Vaidumbas and two Bana kings, namely, Vikramaditya II and Vijayaditya III, whose rule extended over  ‘Perumbanappadi ' comprising  the area to the north of the Palar, between Punganur in the west and Srikalahasti  in the east. Consequently, the Banas and the Vaidumbas sought refuge  with the Rashtrakuta ruler Krishna III from the onslaught of the Cholas.  Krishna III, accompanied by several subordinates including the Banas, led  an expedition against the Chola kingdom and it ended disastrously for the  Cholas. Much of the Chola territory slipped out of Parantaka's hands.  There are a few inscriptions of Parantaka I in this district. Of these, some  attest the closing years of his reign. For instance, an inscription from  Vanamaladinne in Punganur taluk in this district is dated in his 48th regnal  year, corresponding to A.D. 955.  

Krishna III could not stay for long in the enemy. kingdom but continued  to be in effective possession of Tondaimandalam throughout his long reign,  by appointing officers to look after the administration of the conquered  territory. Vajjaradeva was  thus appointed to govern Pulinadu in this district.  A number of inscriptions belonging to the reign of Krishna III have been found  in this district. After the death of Krishna III, Vajjaladeva or Vajjaradeva  appears to have taken advantage of the disturbed conditions and declared  independence, for he is described in an epigraph at Bodinayanipalle in Punganur  taluk as 'ruling over the earth.' The rebellion by Vajjaradeva was, however,  quelled.  

Attempts were made by the Chola ruler Gandaraditya (A.D. 949-957)  to recover the territory lost to Krishna III, but he could not make much  progress. His efforts were continued by Arinjaya and his son Parantaka II  (A.D. 957-973). Remarkable success attended the Chola efforts in the north,  especially during the reign of the latter and by the time Uttama Chola (A.D.  970-985) ascended the throne, the bulk of Tondaimandalam had been recovered  from the Rashtrakutas, The rule of Gandaraditya, Parantaka II (Sundara  Chola) and Madhurantaka Uttama Chola in this district is represented by a  few inscriptions.  

