+++
title = "07 Vaidumbas"
+++

A portion of this district was under the control of another local family  known as the Vaidumbas, Their capital  ‘Vaidumbavrolu’ or 'the city  of the Vaidumbas ' was situated in this district. Several inscriptions of this  family are found in Chittoor and Cuddapah districts and in Kolar district  of Mysore State. About twenty epigraphs of this dynasty are noticed in this  district and they are assigned on palaeographical grounds to about the 8th,  9th and 10th centuries A.D. They yield scanty information. Many are  merely hero-stones commemorating the death of warriors ,in battles and  cattle-raids Thus it is not possible to give any connected account of this  dynasty.  

These rulers appear to have been war-like chiefs, frequently fighting  with their neighbours, the Lonkulas, the Cholas of Renadu, the Banas of  Perumbanappadi and the Nolambas of Nolambavadi. The first ruler of the  line was Vaidumba Maharaja. He came into conflict with the Lonkulas,  another war-like tribe. The Vaidumba army was led by a certain Gandara  Mutraju, but he was killed in the battle. It was during this period that the  Vaidumbas displaced the Cholas of Renadu from Chippili in Madanapalle  taluk and occupied it. Vaidumba Maharaja appears to have been followed  by Sankali or Ganda Sankali. Ganda Trinetra Vaidumba Maharaja was  another ruler of the line. He was an ambitious and powerful king. He  flourished about the beginning of the 10th century A.D., and was always  involved in  wars with his neighbours Early in his reign he defeated Jata Choda and annexed his principality, Renadu 7,000. He fought two battles  with the Nolambas at Mudumaduvu, identified with Mudivedu in Madanapalli  taluk, and Soremadi in Anantapur district. He came out victorious in these  battles and acquired mastery over parts of Kolar district. He was followed  by Manuja Trinetra and Bhuvana Trinetra in succession. Bhuvana Trinetra  was crowned in AD. 973 and his principality included at least parts, if not  the whole of Renadu, Mulikinadu and Pakanadu. The other Vaidumba  chiefs known from the inscriptions were Irigaya Maharaja, Nanrumarayar  son of Tukkarai, Maduka Maharaja and his son, Kaliga Trinetra Bhima  Maharaja.  

