+++
title = "08 WESTERN GANGAS AND NOLAMBA PALLAVAS"
+++

Another dynasty that held sway over a portion of this district was that  of the Western Gangas, the foundation of whose power was assigned to the  second half of the fourth century A.D. They were feudatory to the Pallavas.  A chief of this family, Harivarman (AD. 450-460) was crowned king by  the Pallava ruler Simhavarman I, to crush the Banas in this region. The  Western Ganga kingdom, however, witnessed partition towards the end of  the reign of Sivamara II (A.D. 788-812) between his son and brother Marasimha  and Vijayaditya respectively. A portion of this district appears to have  been included in the share of Marasimha according to the inscriptions which  came to light in Punganur taluk. Four later Ganga chiefs, namely,  (a) Uttamachola-Ganga alias Senbakachchipati Nayanar, (b) Uttamachola  Gangan alias Vira Gangan Vettum Amarabaranam, (c) Uttamachola Ganga  alias Selva Ganga and (d) Selva Ganga, son of Uttamachola Ganga Padmadeva,  are referred to in the epigraphs found in Punganur taluk. Their relationship  with either the main line or with the collateral line is not ascertainable. The  rule of the Western Gangas, however, gradually came to an end after the  capture of their capital Talakad in A.D. 1004 by the Cholas.  

The Nolamba Pallavas: This district was associated with the rule of  yet another minor dynasty known as the Nolambas or the Nolamba Pallavas.  There were eleven rulers in this dynasty. They held sway over Nolambavadi  32,000. They came into conflict with the Banas, the Vaidumbas, the Cholas  and the Rashtrakutas.  

With the succession of Mahendra I in A.D. 878, the Nolamba dynasty  gained considerable strength. Mahcndra, the most powerful of the Nolambas,  extended his conquests on all sides. Under the orders of his Western Ganga  overlord, Rachamalla I, he set out on a conquest of Talakad which was then  in the hands of the collateral line of the Western Gangas. In the course  of the campaign, he asked his subordinates Kaduvatti and Maduva to invade  Puhnadu. Kaduvatt1 attacked and captured Koyarrur (Laddigam near  Punganur) in this district. On hearing this, the Bana king Vijayaditya V1ra  Chulamani Prabhumeru started with his army and dispersed the enemy's  forces. The battle was fierce and several chiefs fell in it. The  other ruler of the dynasty, whose inscriptions are noted in the district,  was Vira Mahendra II. He led an invasion against the province of Tondai mandalam in the Chola kingdom. On returning from his expedition, Vira  Mahendra II entered Nolambavadi, encamped himself at Kolar and conferred  on a private individual the rank of an officer together with a village in Pulinadu  in this district as a gift. Pulinadu appears to have continued under the rule  of the Nolambas even during the latter half of the 10th century A.D., when  another Nolamba chief Iriva Nolamba II granted a village in Pulinadu to  a merchant.  

