+++
title = "09 CHALUKYAS OF KALYANI AND THE IMPERIAL CHOLAS"
+++

The Rashtrakutas were replaced by the Western Chalukyas of Kalyani  in A.D. 973. This district, however, continued to be under the rule of the  Cholas. The rulers who held sway subsequently were Rajaraja I (A.D. 985-1016), Rajendra I (A.D. 1012-1044), Rajadhiraja I (A.D 1052-1063), Vira  rajendra (A.D. 1063-1069) and Adhirajendra (A.D. 1067/68-I070). Of  them, the thirty years of Rajaraja's rule constituted the formative period  of Chola imperialism. A relatively small state at his accession, hardly  recovering from the effects of the Rashtrakuta invasion, the Chola kingdom  grew under him into an extensive and well knit empire The rule of this  as well as the other Chola kings over this area is attested by a number of  inscriptions which register gifts to temples at various places in the district.  The income from the lands thus gifted was spent for the maintenance of  worship in the temple The cattle and sheep endowed to the shrine were  entrusted to shepherds whose main task was to provide ghee for the perpetual  lamps in the temples. A few other inscriptions refer to the digging of tanks,  construction of temples, and levy and remission of taxes.  

In A.D. 1070, the Eastern Chalukyan prince Rajendra occupied the Chola  throne under the title of Kulottunga (A,D. 1070-1120). His accession marks  the commencement of a new era in Chola history. The kingdom of Vengi  became a province of the Chola empire and hence the rulers came to be known  as the Chalukya-Chola emperors. He avoided unnecessary wars and evinced  true regard for the well-being of his subjects. Kulottunga I was followed  by Vikrama Chola (A. D. lll8-1135), Kulottunga II (A. D. 1135-1150),  Rajaraja II (A.D. 1146-1173) and Rajadhiraja II in succession. How the  Chola empire continued to retain its hold over this district during this period  may be inferred from the provenance of their inscriptions found in this district.  One striking feature of this period was the growth in the number of  feudatories and the extent of their influence. It was during this period that  the Telugu Cholas, who acknowledged the suzerainty of the Chola monarchs,  rose to prominence in this as well as the neighbouring districts. A number  of gifts to the temple at Srikalahasti and Tirumala are registered in the name  of these chiefs who did not once find themselves strong enough to defy their  overlords.  

Tondamandalam became part of the Chola empire after its conquest  by Aditya I and remained so till about the middle of the thirteenth century.  The earliest record available here is that of Parantaka I (232 G.T) (907-955)  dated in the 29th year of his reign. His son, Parthivendravarman alias  Aditya II, was viceroy of Tondamandalam for nearly fifteen years commencing from 956 A.D. In the 14th year of his rule i.e., in 970 A.D., Samavai, the wife of a Pallava subordinate, consecrated in the temple of Tirumala a silver image named Manavalapperumal, a replica of the original deity and  instituted festivals (18 & 19 T.T.). There are three inscriptions of Rajaraja I  (985-1014) in this area of which one (170 TI.) from the temple on Tirumala  states that a queen of Parantaka II gifted a pattam of gold.  

Of the next king, Rajendra Chola, two records are available. One of them  mentions the construction of the Kapilesvara temple at Kapilatirtham(224 G.T).

There are eleven inscriptions of Kulottunga I. (1070-1120 A.D.)  ( 381, 382,387, and 388 G.T. and 71, 110, 112, 131, 144, 298, and 657 T.T.) In  the temples of Tirumala and Jogi-Mallavaram and one record of Vikrama  Chola (386 G.T.)  

Of the next king, Rajaraja III, there are seven inscriptions. It is necessary  to refer here to an event which changed the character of the temples of this  region and gave them the present complex. Vaishnava saints, popularly  known as the Alvars, preached devotion to god and inspired many honest  souls to take to Vishnu worship. After them came the Acharyas who gave  this early Vaishnavism a definite shape and form and put it on a firm basis.  The greatest of these was Ramanuja. He made Srirangam his headquarters  and carried on missionary activity. His new interpretation of Vedanta,  popularly known as Visishtadvaita, was making rapid progress. Acharya  Nadamuni, who restored the practice of reciting the Tamil Prabandham in  the temples, visited Tirumala during the course of a pilgrimage. Alavandar,  the next acharya, also paid a visit to the hill temple. He deputed one of  his grandsons, Tirumalai Nambi, to go and reside on the hill and attend to  the pious task of supplying holy water and flowers to the temple. Tirumalai  Nambi migrated to Tirumala and spent his life there in God's service. Next  was Ramanuja. This teacher is said to have visited Tirupati thrice. On  the first occasion, he spent about a year with his uncle, Tirumalai Nambi,  learning the esoteric meaning of Ramayana. His second visit was for  settling a dispute that arose between the Saivites and the Vaishnavites regarding  the nature of the image set up in the Tirumala temple. During the last visit,  which was at the advanced old age of 102, the acharya installed the image  of Govindaraja and laid the foundations of the present town of Tirupati.  

