+++
title = "11 PANDYAS"
+++

The kingdoms that rose subsequently were the Pandya and the Hoysala  in the south, and the Kakatiya and the Yadava in the north. Minor powers  like the Telugu-Cholas of Nellore played their part as auxiliaries to the chief  powers. The accession to the Pandya throne of  Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I  in A.D. 1251 was an important event. He was a famous warrior and a  conqueror under whom the Pandyan power attained its greatest splendour.  In the early years of his reign Jatavarman Sundara Pandya I fought many  wars and rapidly extended his sway to Nellore and beyond. He also came  into conflict with Kakatiya Ganapati whose inscription is noticed on a stone  in front of the Manikantesvara temple at Srikalahasti. Five inscriptions  of Jatavaraman Sundara Pandya I are found in this district. The other Pandya  ruler mentioned in the epigraphs of the district was Maravarman Kulasekhara I  (A.D. 1268-1308/1309). He fought against Hoysala Ramanatha who had  allied himself with the Chola ruler Rajendra III, defeated both and occupied  their territory. After this loss, Ramanatha started a war against his brother  Narasimha III and succeeded in capturing some territory. An inscription  dated in his 38th regnal year, corresponding to A.D. 1293, 1s found at Punganur.  It records the grant of four dandaka of land for offerings in the temple of  Karumanikkattalvar at the place by a certain Vamanavanan Kuttapperumal.  

*The Pandyan interlude*-The power of the Cholas declined about the  middle of the thirteenth century and the Pandyas, under Maravarman Sundara I,  became aggressive. This king invaded Tondamandalam, subjugated all the  Chola subordinates in this region and reached as far north as Nellore and  performed Virabhiseka there. There are several records of this Pandyan  king in the Tirumala temple (127, 164, 172, 175,231,239,241, and 140-TT).  

