+++
title = "12 YADAVARAYAS"
+++

The Yadavarayas were a local dynasty exercising authority over the  northern and eastern portion of Tondamandalam. Tirukkalattideva Yadava raya was the first chief of the family. He assumed high sounding titles such as  Chalukyanarayana ' which indicate their connection with the Eastern  Chalukyas from whom they appear to have acquired a portion of the V engi  kingdom. His inscriptions are noticed in Chittoor, Nellorc and North Arcot  districts. He strengthened his power by entering into matrimonial alliance  with the Telugu Cholas. He was succeeded by his son Virarakshasa Yadava 

raya who was in turn followed by Vira Narasingadeva Yadavaraya. He  ruled over the principality for fifty-one years. He fought on the side of the  Chola ruler, Rajaraja III, in the wars which Kopperunjinga waged. He  came into conflict with the elder Kadavaraya Alagiya-Siyan. He was a  subordinate of Vira Gandagopala, the Telugu-Pallava chief, whom Jatavarman  Sundara Pandya I claimed to have defeated and killed. Another member  of the family was Tiruvenkatanatha Yadavaraya. He ruled the principality  for about fifteen years till A.D. 1336--37. On the request of his general Singaya  Dannayaka, Tiruvenkatanatha Yadavaraya granted half the village of Pongalur  for the celebration of the ' Adi ' festival in the temple of Tiruvenkadamudaiyan.  He was subordinate to the Hoysala ruler Ballala IIl and paid tribute to him  by levying a tax called the 'Vallaladeva-vari.' His relationship with the  earlier members of the family or with his successor, Sriranganatha is not  ascertainable. However, it is presumed that Tiruvenkatanatha was the father  of Sriranganatha Yadavaraya. During this period a number of taxes were  levied. The taxes were classified as gold taxes, grain taxes, taxes relating  to free service known as ' Amanji-Vagai,' taxes levied by the assembly of the  Nattar, and other old and new taxes promulgated from time to time. Some  of the taxes related to tolls levied on animals, road-cess or a kind of poll-tax,  profession tax on merchants, oil-mongers and weavers, licence fee for planting  gardens and fishing in ponds and poundage on stray cattle. Two of the  three ' ancient and customary aids ' mentioned in the inscriptions were the  taxes levied for the benefit of the heir-apparent and the queen-mother. The  third one, i.e., the aid for ransoming the body of the king if captured by the  enemy, occurs as a kind of tribute paid to the liege lord.  

Sriranganatha Yadavaraya succeeded to the principality in A.D. 1336 or 1337 and ruled for about 20 years. Consequent on the establishment  

of the Vijayanagar kingdom, he submitted himself to the Vijayanagar authority  and ruled as a subordinate of Harihara I. He is reported to have waged  wars against kings when defied his commands, driven them out of their  magnificent cities and made them seek shelter on mountains. As the period  was characterised by political turmoil, Sriranganatha might have taken an  active part in such warfare either for self-aggrandisement or in support of  Vijayanagar  

The invasions of the Delhi Sultanate, which began towards the end of  the 13th century A.D., upset all the four major kingdoms in the south and  caused a period of confusion terminated by the rise and expansion of the  Bahmani and Vijayanagar kingdoms in the second quarter of the fourteenth  century A.D. From the reign of Muhammad I (A.D. 1358-1375) almost  right up to the end of the Bahmani kingdom, there was internecine warfare  between the two powers and the bone of contention between them was the  Krishna-Tungabhadra doab. Though the Bahmani dynasty came to an  end by A.D. 1538, the Bahmani Sultan ceased to exercise any control whatsoever  long before that date, over the governors of the provinces constituting the  Bahmani kingdom.  

