+++
title = "13 TIRUMALA IN THE TRANSITORY PERIOD 1260-1360 A D"
+++

Tondamandalam was included in the Vijayanagara empire from the very  time of its foundation in 1336 A.D. Still, the earliest Vijayanagara record  found in the Tirumala-Tirupati region is dated 1359 A.D. The period intervening between the time of Sundara Pandya and this Vijayanagara record  is a period of transition. During this time various Chola subordinates took  advantage of the weakness of the Cholas and assumed independence. They  ligure in this region without acknowledging the suzerainty of anybody.  

Of these chiefs, two later Pallavas, father and son, named Kopperunjmga,  created considerable trouble. The elder Kopperunjinga or Kadavaraya ruled  over a small chieftaincy round about Sendamangalam. He raided Tonda mandalam in 1220 A.D., and held a Pllrl of it. His son, the famous Kopperunjinga, alias Khadgamalla, crowned himself in 1243 A. D., invaded  Tondamandalam and fought a battle at Urattur with Narasinga Yadavaraya,  the local chieftain. He went further north along the coast upto Draksharama,  in the East Godavary district, received a rude shock at the hands of the Kakatiya  king, Ganapatideva and returned home humiliated. Later, be was subjugated  by Sundara Pandya I.  Two records of this Kopperunjinga are found at  Tirumala. (226 and 227  TT.).  

A number of Telugu Pallava chiefs were governing parts of Tondamandalam  as Chola subordinates. They held the modern Nellore, Cuddapah, Kurnool,  Chittoor, North Arcot, South Arcot,. and Chingleput districts. They too  assumed independence on account of the weakness of the contemporary  Chola kings. When the Pandya entered the field, they acknowledged his  suzerainty for the time being. Vijayanagandagopala, Rajagandagopala and  Tnpurantaka are chieftains of this line represented in the Tirumala Temple  records of this region. (173, 285, 143, 73, 431, 128, 296, 11 I, 137, 139, 141,  129, 125, 134,652, 119, 123, 126,443,221, and 72, TT and 127, GT).  

Nellore was the headquarters of a line of Telugu Chola family which too  exercised considerable influence in Tondamandalam. Allun Tirukalattideva  of this family held, even the city of Kanchi for a time. He figures in the records  at Tirumala.  

The Yadavarayas were the most important local chieftains in the Tirumala Tirupati region. They were intimately connected with the temples of this  area and made valuable benefactions to them. They governed the Venkatagiri,  Kalahasti and Chandragiri taluks of the Nellore and Chittoor districts. The  earliest known member of this family was Ghattideva, who flourished between  I 184 and 1227 A.D., as a Chola subordinate. He is also stated to have invited  Ramanuja to settle a dispute that arose between the Saivas and Vaishnavas  at Tirumala. This view is untenable because Ramanuja is said to have passed  away soon after 1130 A.D. and Ghattideva did not become a ruler till  1184 A.D.,  Ghattideva's son, Rajamalla, lived and ruled between 1208-1237 A.D. He  is supposed to have consecrated a deity named Yadavanarayana. The next  chieftain was Tirukalattideva who is assignable to 1191-1246 A.D. He  governed a large area extending from Tiruvannamalai to Kalahasti. His  son was Virarakshasa, who flourished in the reign of Kulottunga I. Then  came Vira Narasingadeva, the greatest chieftain of the Yadavaraya family.  He ruled between 1209-1262 A.D. He was first a Chola feudatory and then  a Pandyan subordinate. He was a great benefactor of the temples of Tirumala  and Tirupati. Vira Narasinga's son, Tiruvenkatanatha, governed between  1310-1336 A.D. This was the time when remarkable events took place outside  Tondamandalam. An independent Muslim kingdom, popularly known as  the Sultanate of Delhi, was established in northern India towards the end  of the 12th century and embarked upon a career of rapid expansion. Both  Hinduism and lingering Buddhism and their institutions suffered terribly  at the hands of these Muslim rulers. The Khalji dynasty established itself  on the throne of Delhi towards the end of the 13th century. Two great Hindu  kingdoms flourished at this time in the Deccan, the Yadava kingdom with  its capital at Devagiri or modern Daulatabad and the famous Kakatiya empire  which embraced the entire Telugu speaking area. To the south-west there  was the kingdom of the Hoysalas with its capital at Dvarasamudra, in the  Mysore state. In the Tamil country, the Pandyas were powerful and ruled  from Madura. Allauddin, the Khalji governor of Kara and Allahabad, led  an unprovoked invasion against Devagiri in 1296 A.D. and obtained great  wealth. Very soon thereafter he usurped the throne of Delhi and became  the Sultan. He sent an invasion in 1303 A.D., against the Andhra country  but it was repelled. He sent another expedition in 1309 A.D. under the lead  of his famous general, Malik Kaffur. Malik Kaffur seized Warangal and  extracted immense wealth from its ruler, Kakatiya Prataparudradeva. He  then marched in a south-western direction, entered the Hoysala territory  and plundered it. The Muslim general then entered the Tamil country and  harassed the Pandyan kingdom. He returned home in 1310 A.D. carrying  much wealth and many precious stones obtained from the Hindu kingdoms  of the Deccan and South India. The Tirumala-Tirupati region was saved  from the ravages of this Muslim invader because he took a south-western  direction and did not march due south from Warangal through the heart  of the Andhra country.  

The Koil-Olugu, a traditional account of the famous Sri Ranganatha temple  of Srirangam, mentions an important event which seems to have taken place  about this time. It is stated that in 1327 A.D., during the course of his  campaigns in the Tamil country, Malik Kaffur reached the neighbourhood of Srirangam. The local people were then engaged in celebrating the annual  festival for the god and neglected the information conveyed to them. When,  however, they found that the information was only too correct and that the  Muslim army was nearby, they took some emergency measures. The sanctum  of the temple was walled up and all the jewels were hidden. The processional  image of Ranganatha was smuggled out of Srirangam by Pillai Lokacarya  and other devotees. These fugitives wandered from place to place and ultimately  reached Tirumala. There the image was held suspended before a ravine  and kept for a long time. The date mentioned by the Koil-Olugu is obviously  wrong because Malik Kaffur's invasion took place ID 1309-1310 A.D.tand  not in 1327 A.D. Nor was there a Muslim Invasion of the Tamil country  in 1327 A.D. The incident mentioned in this temple history must be ascribed  to 1310 A.D.  

The troubles of the Hindu kingdoms of the Deccan and South India  were not over with the return of Malik Kaffur to Delhi. The Khaljis were succeeded by the Tughlaks as rulers of the Sultanate of Delhi. Ghiasuddin,  the first ruler of this family, sent a strong expedition against the Kakatiya  kingdom and the Andhra country in 1321 A.D. under the lead of his son  and crown prince, Ulugh Khan. The Andhra generals offered stiff resistance  and repelled this invasion. Ulugh Khan renewed his attack in 1323 A.D.  when the Kakatiya ruler was completely unprepared. A serious battle was  fought and the king was defeated and captured. After his victory at Warangal,  the Muslim general marched through the Cuddapah and Kurnool districts  and penetrated into the districts farther south. He too marched in the south western direction and conquered the area lying between Nellore in the east  and Quilon in the west, known as Ma 'bar. He returned to Delhi through  the coastal districts of Andhra and Orissa. Thus for a second time the  Tirumala-Tirupati area escaped certain destruction and misery at the hands  of the Muslim invaders.  

Ulugh Khan left the area conquered by him in the charge of efficient  governors. After returning to Delhi, he killed his father and ascended the  throne, assuming the title of Mohammad-bin-Tughlak. Very soon after  this, the people of the Andhra country recovered from the shock of this Muslim  invasion and made successful attempts at shaking off the Muslim yoke imposed  upon them. The old generals and feudatories of Kakatiya Prataparudradeva  gathered the people behind them and liberated large areas driving away the  Muslim governors of the Sultan. Thus, coastal Andhra, Telangana and  Rayalaseema soon recovered their independence. Among those that fled  from Warangal after its capture by Ulugh Khan were two brothers, Harihara  and Bukka, sons of Sangama and guards of the treasury of Kakatiya  Prataparudradeva. These brothers went to the small kingdom of Kampila,  

situated on the bank of the Tungabhadra and obtained employment under  its Hindu ruler. Muhammad Tugblak sent an expedition against Kampila  in 1327 A.D. The ruler of the kingdom was killed and a few men were taken  prisoners. A Muslim governor was appointed to administer the Kampila  region. Very soon, however, the local people rebelled and drove away this  governor. Among the men captured in the siege of Kampila were the two  brothers Harihara and Bukka. The Sultan released these two brothers,  nominated Harihara as the governor and Bukka as the commander and sent  them both to Kampila in order to restore peace and order. These brothers  subjugated all unruly elements and soon consolidated their position in the modern Rayalasima area. They then came into contact with the famous  saint, Vidyaranya, and developed, under his inspiration, the idea of founding  a new kingdom which would protect the country, the religion and the culture  of the Hindus from the destructive activity of the Muslims. They founded  the city of Vijayanagara on the southern bank of the Tungabhadra in 1336 A.D.,  made it their capital and proclaimed the establishment of an independent Hindu kingdom. The Sultan was preoccupied with more serious troubles  and could not do anything to check this insubordination of Harihara and  Bukka.  

