+++
title = "14 RAYAS OF VIJAYANAGAR"
+++

The district then passed under the Rayas of Vijayanagar. Four dynasties, namely, Sangama, Saluva, Tuluva and Aravidu, ruled over the Vijayanagar  kingdom from A.D.1336 to the last quarter of the 17th century A.D. Harihara  founded the Sangama dynasty in A.D. 1336 and the kingdom during this  period extended from Nellore in the south-east to Dharwar and Badami in northern Karnataka. Harihara I was followed on the throne by his  brother .Hulli I. To unify the kingdom and strengthen his position, Bukka I  appointed his own sons as the governors of the provinces and made them  responsible for the maintenance of the royal authority. Bhaskara Bhavadura  was thus made governor of Udayagiri and Kumara Kampana of Mulbagal  and Padaividu which included a portion of this district. There are a few  inscriptions of Bulli I and his son Kumara Kampana in this district. The  earliest of these, which is undated, pertaining to Bukka I, registers the grant  

of a village to the temple at Tirumala for • sandhi • (offerings) twice a day.  The inscriptions of Kampana and bis subordinates, found at Tirumala and  other places, register grants mainly to temples. Of the subordinates, Saluva  Mangidcva, a general of Kampana, Somappa and Gopanna deserve mention,  Saluva Mangideva governed the region surrounding Chittoor, which was  the headquarters of the later Saluva chiefs. Somappa was Kampana's  pradhani. He is referred to in two inscriptions of Kampana. He issued  an order to Meydevar, who was in charge of the taxes levied in Pulinadu in  this district, to assign certain duties, imposed in kind, on all articles that passed  through the distriet, for the benefit of the Vishnu temple at Kurumavi which  is stated to have been a village situated in Cbitturirajya. Gopanna was a  Brahmin general of Kampana and the governor of • Scoji.' He went to  Tirumala on a pilgrimage and found the idol of Ranganatha of Srirangam  worshippcd along with that of Venkatesvara. The idol (Alagiya Manavala Perumal) was brought to Tirumala for safe custody during the Muhammadan  invasion of Srirangam. With the consignment  of the priests of Tirumala temple,  he transferred the image first to Senji and thence to Srirangam.  Harihara II succeeded to the throne of Vijayanagar in A.D. 1377 and  ruled till A.D. 1404. The appointment of his son Devaraya as the governor  of tJdayagiri in A. 0. 1370 marks a new epoch in the relations between  

Yijayanagar and Kondavidu. The rule of Haribara n over this district is  attested by a few epigraphs noted in this district. One of the&c inscriptions  registers the institution of a festival for Sri Venkatesvara in Haribara's name  in the Tamil month of ' Masi.' On the death of Haribara II in A.D. 1404,  the succession to the Vijayanagar throne was disputed. Taking advantage  of the disturbed conditions, the Reddis of Kondavidu launched in A.D. 1406  an attack upon the Udayagiri-rajya and occupied, among others, Pulugulanadu,  a subdivision of Chandragirisima. Malla Reddi, a cousin of the Reddi ruler  Peda Komati Vema who led the attack, remained in the occupied area till  A.D. 1413. He was, however, expelled by an army sent from Udayagiri  by Devaraya I. The rule of Devaraya I in this district is testified by a few  inscriptions ranging from A.D. 1405 to A.D. 1418. They refer to the grants  made by the king, the crown-prince Vijaya Bukka who was also known as  Vijayabhupati or Vira Bukka and their subordinates. Mention is made of  J ommana, son of Kampana II, in one of the inscriptions found in this district.  The reign of the V1jayanagar ruler Devaraya II (A.D. 1422-1446) is also  represented by some inscriptions. One of his subordinates, Mallana, governed  Cbandragirirajya from S. 1330 (A.D. 1408) to S. 1366 (A.D. 1444). He was  succeeded in the governance of Chandragirirajya by Saluva Peri-Mallayadeva  Maharaja. In A.D. 1463, i.e., during the reign of Mallikarjuna, Hamvira,  the son of the Gajapati ruler Kapilendra, led an invasion against Vijayanagar  empire and captured, among others, the fort of Chandragiri. However,  for reasons not ascertainable, the forces of Orissa retraced their steps from  this area.  

The frequent attacks of the Gajapatis on the Vijayanagar kingdom, the  assassination of Mallikarjuna and the usurpation of the Vijayanagar throne  by Virupaksha II, provided the long awaited opportunity to the forces of  disintegration. Saluva Narasimha, son of Saluva Gunda the chief of  Chandragiri, who succeeded to bis family estate Chandragiri in A.D. 1456,  slowly extended bis power over the districts of Chittoor, North Arcot, South  Arcot and Kolar during these years of anarchy. His power grew so great  that Mallikarjuna's young son, Rajasekhara, sought refuge at his court. Like  most usurpers, Saluva Narasimha found that it was easier to capture the throne  than to enforce his authority in the kingdom. He, therefore, resolved to  seize the opportunity and sent an army under Narasa Nayaka to expel Praudha  Devaraya, who came to the throne on the death of Virupaksha II. Narasa  Nayaka met with no opposition and Praudha Devaraya fled from the capital.  Saluva Narasimha soon followed Narasa Nayaka to the capital and celebrated  his coronation about the close of A.D. 1485.  

With the coronation of Saluva Naras1mba, the second or the Saluva  dynasty came to power. Saluva Narasimha ruled the kingdom till A.D. 1490  and was succeeded by his son Immadi Narasimha with Narasa Nayaka as  his regent. During this period kandadai Ramanujayyangar was a prominent spiritual leader who had devoted his life to the cause of religion. He was  presumed to be the guru of Saluva Narasimha and he had been of much help  in organising and maintaining the free feeding houses established by Saluva  Narasimha both at Tirupati and Tirumala. In appreciation of his services,  Saluva Narasimha gave him a free band in the maintenance of the Ramanuja kutams for which he granted lands and villages. Narasa Nayaka, however,  died in A.D. 1503 bequeathing the kingship and the kingdom to his eldest  son, the ambitious Vira Narasimba. Vira Narasimba overthrew Immad1  Narasimba, proclaimed himself king in A.D, I 505 and established the third  or the Tuluva dynasty. Vira Narasimba whose reign also 1s represented by a  few epigraphs ruled till A.D. 1509.  

On the death of Vira Narasimba, his half-brother Krishnadevaraya  ascended the Vijayanagar throne. About 85 inscriptions pertaining to the  reign of Krishnadevaraya are noted in this district. They range in date from  S. 1432 (A.D. 1510) to S. 1451 (A.D. 1529). A few records register the offerings and gifts made by the monarch and bis two consorts, Cbinnadevi and Tirumala devi, during their frequent visits to the temple of Sri Venkateswara on the  Tirumala (whom he venerated as his patron deity) and the temple at Srikalahasti. A few others, in which Krishnadcvaraya is acknowledged  as the overlord, mention the gifts made by his subordinates to temples at  various places in this district. Krishnadvvaraya visited the temple of Sri  Venkateswara seven times and also dedicated his work, 'Amuktamalyada'  to Lord Venkateswara.  

His visits were, however, not isolated tours undertaken for the purpose  of pilgrimage to this sacred shrine, Except the last two or three visits, which were avowedly made during his religious journeys, the first four occasions  were in the course of bis campaigns against the Gajapatis. Krishnadevaraya's  first visit to Tirumala along with his two Queens, took place on the 10th of  February 1513. From there he proceeded to Srikalahasti and presented  jewels to Srikalahastisvara. He was again at Tirumala for the second time  on the 2nd of May 1513. From Tirumala he proceeded once more to  Srikalahasti where he was present on the 11th of May. On the 8th of June,  he journeyed from Vijayanagar to Tirumala and Srikalahasti for the third  time and was back at his capital on the 20th of September 1513. These flying  visits to the temples at Tirumala and Srikalahasti lasted for very short  durations.  

The problem of succession seems to have engaged the attention of Krishna  devaraya during the last years of his reign. He set his half-brother Achyuta  free from the prison at Chandragiri and nominated him as his successor.  Achyuta's accession to the throne was not peaceful as Aliya Ramaraja, son-in-law of Krishnadevaraya, proclaimed an infant son of Krishnadevaraya  emperor and attempted to seize the throne. Aliya Ramaraja, however, failed  because Saluva Nayaka, the most powerful nobleman in the empire and a  supporter of Achyuta, seized the throne and held it until the arrival of Achyuta  from Chandragiri.  

It was probably the opposition of Ramaraja that induced Achyuta to  take an unusual step. As soon as he heard the news of his brother's death,  instead of hastening to the capital, he proceeded to Tirumala where  he had his coronation celebrated. From there he went to Srikalahasthi where  the coronation ceremony was repeated. It must be noted that Achyuta was  the first ruler of Vijayanagar who had his coronation celebrated in a place  outside the capital. He was also the first king to crown himself on more  than one occasion. It looks as if, fearing the opposition of his rival in the  capital, Achyuta had his coronation purposely celebrated 10 the two holy  places of the empire ostensibly to strengthen his claim to the throne. He  came to an agreement with Ramaraja to enter into a sort of partnership with  him in governing the empire. The coronation of Achyuta was then  celebrated for the third time at Vijayanagar and his authority was recognised  by all. Saluva Nayaka, who was not satisfied with this arrangement, rebelled  against Achyuta. To suppress this rebellion Achyuta proceeded to the south  accompanied by a huge army. Leaving the army behind at Chandragiri, he  proceeded to Tirumala and Srikalahasti, worshipped the deities there and  endowed them with valuable gifts. After suppressing the rebellion, the  Vijayanagar ruler, on his mum journey, again visited these temples, On  this occasion of his visit to Truvenkatamudaiyan, he was accompanied by  his queen Varadadcvi and his son Kumara Vcnkatadri. He performed the  mahadanas 'kapila-pasu,' 'svamavarsham' and presented to God Venkatesvara a big 'kapha' fully decked with pearls, rubies, emeralds, and diamonds,  four pon-valaiyam,' a pair of 'uchchippu' set with gems for the bead, a kuttam, ornamented with diamonds for the top of the crown; a long string  of pearls and other jewels consisting of differently shaped gold beads and  nuts."  

Achyuta, however, did not stay for long at the capital and had to proceed  to Gooty in Anantapur district which fell into the hands of a rebel. He availed  himself of the opportunity on this occasion to pay a visit to Tirumala. He  was present in Tirumala on the 26th of December 1S3S, when he instituted  two new festivals, namely, the Lakshmidevi mahotsavam to be celebrated  for Tiruvenkatamudaiyan and Alaimelmangal Nachchiyar for five days,  and the Punarvasu Tirunal for Raghunathan (Sri Rama), Nachchiyar (Sitadevi)  and Daiya-Perumal (Lakshmana) on each of the 13 days of the Punarvasu  star occurring in the year. He seems to have returned to Vijkyanagar sometime  before S. 1458 (A.D. 1536).  

The rule of Achyuta came to an end in A.D. 1542 and he was followed  on the throne by his son Venkata and his brother-in-law Salakaraju Tirumala  for short periods. The death of Achyutadevaraya was the signal for the renewal  of the struggle between Ramaraja and Salakaraju Tirumala who supported  Sadasiva and Venkata respectively. The conflict, however, ended in the  victory of Sadasiva and Aliya Ramaraja. Sadasiva was crowned in A.D. 1543  and Aliya Ramaraja became his regent.  

The opponents of Ramaraja who could not bear to see their enemy  established permanently as the supreme head of the state attempted to defy  his authority. They obtained control over the fort of Chandragiri and its  dependent territory. Farther south, the chiefs refused to pay tribute to the  empire. This rebellion was suppressed in its initial stages by sending an  expedition against them. The increase in the power of Ramaraja by leaps and  bounds was very much feared by the Deccan Sultanates and his interference  in their internal affairs was not liked by them. When his power became  formidable, the Deccan Sultanates formed a League and brought about the  downfall of Ramaraja in the battle fought at Rakshasi Tangadi in A.D. 1565.  

On Ramaraja's death, his brother Tirumala became the regent and the  sole guardian of the emperor Sadasiva. He found the atmosphere of the  capital uncongenial to the advancement of his plans of assuming royal titles  and founding a dynasty. He, therefore, left Vijayanagar and retired to  Penugonda in Anantapur district. He next divided the empire into three  subdivisions, roughly corresponding to the three main linguistic areas of which  it was composed and entrusted the government of each of them to one of his three sons. According to this arrangement, Venkata the youngest, assumed  the governorship of the Tamil country· and carried on the administration  from Chandragiri in this district. Tirumala subsequently overthrew Sadasiva  and had himself formally crowned in A.D. 1570. He ruled for a few months  and was succeeded by his son Sriranga I. Sriranga's reign witnessed an  Invasion by the Bijapur Sultan, Ali Adil Shah in A.D. 1576. On the approach  of the enemy, he repaired to the fort of Chandragiri with all the treasures.  The Bijapur Sultan sent one of his officers by name Faz! Khan to Chandragiri  with instructions to conclude a pact with the Raya. Faz! Khan successfully  persuaded Sriranga to accompany him to the camp of Ali Adil Shah and  conclude an alliance with him. Sriranga ruled till A.D. 1584 and died leaving  no children.  

Venkata II ascended the throne in A.D. 1585. His reign witnessed an  invasion of his kingdom by the Golkonda Sultan Muhammad-Qui!. The  Qutb Shahi forces overran all the places that came m their way and Venkata  was forced to sue for peace. Venkata took full advantage of the brief respite  which he had thus obtained and later cast off all pretensions of submission  and defied the Golkonda Sultan. A section of the Sultan's army led by a  member of the Ravilla family marched south and reached the hill fort of  Gurramkonda in Vayalpad taluk. Venkata II commanded Matli Anania  t~vaders to flight. Matli Ananta marched to Gurramkonda with  bis army and laid siege to it. The Ravilla chief, who was well-provided with  artillery and ammunition, offered stubborn resistance, but Ananta showed  ~ogged perseverance in pushing forward the operations. He succeeded at  last in demolishing one of the bastions and the garrison could not hold -0ut  for long. The Ravilla chief realised the gravity of the situation and immediately  sued for peace, and, having probably surrendered the fort, departed to bis  place. Venkata II's reign also witnessed internal rebellions. Nandela  Krishnamaraja was the rebel, and he was defeated and taken to Chandragiri,  where he remained in captivity until his death.  

Venkata II died in A.D. 1614 and he was followed by Sriranga II and  Ramadeva whose reigns were uneventful. The death of Ramadeva plunged  the kingdom into anarchy and civil war. Venkata III, who came out victorious  in the war of succession, had to contend against both internal troubles and  foreign invasions. Of the latter, the one sent by the Qutb Shabi ruler Abdullah  Qutb Shah in A.D. 1642, is important. Venkata III and his allies could not,  however, offer effective resistance. His allies deserted him and he was also  forced to retire to the mountainous tracts in Chittoor district where he sojourned  in a helpless condition for sometime. When he lay dying among the hills  of Narayanavaram, his nephew Sri Ranga III, finding a good chance of saving  the Vijayanagar throne for himself, came for.vard as the defender of his ancestral  kingdom.  

Sriranga III was proclaimed king on the 29th of October, 1642. The first  thing which he had to do was to expel the invaders from his dominions. To  oppose the advance of the Oolkonda army, he went to Tirupati and entrenched  himself there in A.D. 1643. Though he had a large army with him, he dared  not face the invaders who were better armed. Moreover, the treachery of  some of his nobles probably engendered a feeling of insecurity. Damerla  Venkatapati Nayaka of Srikalahasti, who was hostile to him ever since his  accession, treacherously encouraged the enemy to attack. Snraoga, therefore,  abandoned his camp and retreated towards Narayanavaram and thence to  Vellore on the approach of the Golkonda army. Nayaka's treason was  discovered on Sriranga's return and he was arrested and kept in confinement.  Though Sriranga could have put him to death, he contented himself with  depriving him of some of his possessions.  

The kingdom was again threatened by the B1japur and Golkonda rulers  The B1japur Sultan sent an expedition under Mustafa Khan while the latter  sent another under Muhammad Said Mir Jumla. Mustafa Khan marched  against Vellore, after passing through Bukkapatnam in this district while  another Bijapur general Khan-i-Khannan went to Gurramkonda. Sriranga  made desperate efforts to defend himself even by taking the jewels of the  women of Vellore and the money of the temple of Tirumala. The Golkonda  army led by Mir Jumla advanced along the east coast, capturing in quick  succession Tirupati, Chandragiri and other places in this district. Sriranga  seems to have given up all hopes of defending the kingdom. He, therefore, fled to Tanjore and then to Mysore. Subsequently the fort of Gurramkonda  was also subdued. Sriranga's movements during the two or three years  that followed his flight to Mysore are not known. But his sojourn in Mysore  was not, however, long. In the meanwhile, the Qutb Shahi Sultan, Abdullah  Qutb Shah feared the growing influence of Mir Jumla in Karnatak and  wanted to bring him down. This led to differences between the two. To  safeguard bis possessions in the Karnatak, Mir Jumla persuaded Sriranga  to return to Karnatak and recapt11re the territory occupied by Bijapur, The  Bijapur general, Khan Muhammad immediately proceeded to Vellore to  re-establish Bijapur authority there, In the fight that ensued, Khan Muhammad  was obliged to come to terms with Sriranga and cede to him the fort of  Chandragiri with its dependencies. Abdullah Qutb Shah who was enraged  by the treacherous conduct of Mir Jumla entered into an alliance with Sriranga,  This enabled Sriranga to concert measures to recover his lost pos9e8Sions.  He captured Tirupati and planned the COllqUe8t of other places. This, however,  did not materialise due to the sudden change in the attitude of the Sultan  of Golkonda, who shortly afterwards cast off the mask of friendship and  sent armies to re-establish his authority in the Karnatak. Sriranp sl!lfercd  defeat and Chandragiri, a fort ceded to him in A.D. 1653 by the Bijapur general  Khan Muhammad, passed in A.D. 1658 into the hands of the Qutb Shahi  officers. Sriranga was forced to flee for a second time. He appears to hsve  returned to ~nda (Anantapur) in A.D. 166S and ruled a portion of  the kingdom until A.D. 1681.  

