+++
title = "16 MATLIS"
+++

The Matli chiefs were among the most important of the feudatory  dynasties connected with this district. They belonged to the Devachoda  family. They ruled from Madi in Rayachoti taluk (Cuddapah) and came  to the forefront when the Vijayanagar empire was at its zenith. They had  acquired sufficient status to enter into matrimonial alliances with the imperial  house itself. They stood firmly by the rulers of the fourth or the Aravidu  dynasty and helped to continue the great traditions of the Vijayanagar  empire in diverse spheres.  

The progenitor of the family was Bommaraja. He had three sons, namely,  Somaraja, Timmaraja and Mangaraja. Somaraja had five sons. The eldest  of them, Potaraja, had in turn six sons of whom the eldest was Varadaraja.  Timmaraja's son, and grandson, were Konaraja and Ellamaraja respectively.  Ellamaraja had four sons, Tirumala, Varada, Chinna Tunma and Ananta  (Matti Anantaraja, the author of  ‘Kakutsthavijayamu’). Mangaraja had a  son by name Guruvaya Devachoda. Of all these chiefs, Varadaraja, the  son-in-law of Krishnadevaraya, functioned as the virtual ruler. An epigraph  at Tirupati of S. 1465 (A.D. 1544) registers his gift of 312 rekhai-pon (gold  coins). This was made use of by the temple authorities for the improvement  of tanks and channels in the temple villages. Varadaraja bore many titles  such as ‘Kaverivallabha’ ' and ' Gayibindibirudu.' Ellamaraja, the son of  Komaraja, enhanced the influence of the Matlis. He stood loyal to the  Vijayanagar ruler Venkata II and helped him in suppressing the rebellion  of the two Kondaraju brothers, Kondaraju Tirupaliraju and Kondaraju  Venkata, the rulers of Sidhout. In appreciation of his services, Venkata II  conferred Pulugulanatisima on Chandragirirajya on Ellamaraja as amaranayankara. The next Matli chief of Importance was Anantaraja. He was a great  warrior and also a scholar of considerable merit. As already observed, he led an mvasion against Gurramkonda which was then occupied by the Qutb  Shahi forces, at the instance of his overlord Venkata II. Anantaraja was  followed by his son Tiruvengalanatha and his grandson Kumara Ananta in  succession. Kumara Ananta exercised authority over the territory lying between  the hills of Tirupati and Ahobila (Kumool district). He was a great scholar.  He was deeply attached to the Visishtadvaita school of Ramanuja but was  however, tolerant of other schools of thought. Considerable light is thrown  on the varied achievements of Kumara Ananta in two epigraphs of S. ISSO  (A.D. 1628) noted on the walls of the Pathala Mantapa at Alipiri at the foot  of the Tirumala hills. He founded about a dozen free feeding houses for  the benefit of pilgrims proceeding on foot between Setu and the Himalayas.  Tirupati was one among the places where such a house was established. At  Tirupati itself, he constructed, among others, the  agra-gopura ' (the tower  on the top of the front hill called the Gali-gopuram), a Sopanamarga '(pathway  with a flight of steps) and an 'Unnata Kelimandapa' (meaning literally a superb sports ' mandapam). The other inscriptions at Tirupati reveal that  the major works for which Kumara Ananta was responsible at Tirupati included  the big outer gopuram (tower) of the temple of Govindaraja with seven storeys  and the second gopuram at the foot of the hills called the Kotta-gopuram  through which the pathway to Tirumala runs. His numerous other offerings  to the shrine included a crown set with gems. He made many gifts to the  temple at Srikalahasti also. From all this, it appears that the Matli  principality had reached its zenith under Kumara Anantaraja.  

Kumara Anantaraja was succeeded by his adopted son, Anantaraja  Devachoda or Kumara Ananta II. During his rule, the Matlis lost a sizable  portion of their principality to the Sultan of Golkonda in A.D. 1644 or 1645.  In spite of this setback, his sway extended over a fairly extensive area, comprising Pulugulanadu  in Chandragirirajya and Pottapinadu and siddhavatamsima in Cuddapah district. Kumara Ananta accompanied his uncle Ellama, who also helped him in the administration of the principality,  inflicted a severe defeat on the army sent by Abdullah Qutb Shah. Fearing  reprisal, Kumara Ananta fled to Ikkeri-Basavapuram. As expected, Mir  Jumla marched against his principality and after occupying it, entrusted its  administration to Triambaka Sankaraji Pant. With this, the administration  of the Matlis in this district came to an end, though it is reported that their  rule over parts of Rajampet taluk in Cuddapah district was revived.  

Subsequent important events relevant to this district were the march  of Sivaji through the Tirupati pass in this district in his expedition against  Oinjee during A.D. 1677-78 and the annexation of the Qutb Shahi kingdom  to the Mughal empire in A.D. 1687 by Aurangzeb.  

