+++
title = "17 MUSLIM RULE 1650-1800 A D"
+++

The Tirumala-Tirupati region came to be conquered by the Sultans of  Golconda by about the middle of the 17th century and remained under Muslim  rule for about a century and half. This was a period of confusion, chaos  and disorder and there was practically no government worth the name in  this region. The Hindu empire of Vijayanagara had vanished and various  interested parties like the Qutub Shah, the Mughals, the Nizam, the Marathas,  the Nawabs of Arcot, Hyder Ali, the English and the French entered the  arena and added to the confusion and misery of this area.  

Qutub Shahi rule:-The Vijayanagara emperor, Venkata II, granted to  the English East India Company a small site on the east coast in 1640 A.D.  on which Fort St. George was built. Further south, the French  established a settlement at Pondicherry and the nationals of these two European  states rapidly increased their strength and exploited the rivalries of the local  princes in their own wars during the next century. Qutub Shahi expansion  into the districts of the eastern Carnatic assumed a serious phase in 1646 A.D.  when the celebrated general, Mir Jumla, led a number of raids. He soon  took Tondamanad, Tirupati and Chandragiri and devastated the Chittoor  and North Arcot districts. He penetrated further south and captured Ponneri,  Poonamalli, Kanchi, Gingee and Wandiwash. Soon after this, he deserted  Golconda and walked into the Mughal camp. Shah Jahan, the Mughal  emperor, confired the Camatic as a Jagir on Mir Jumla and Tupaki Krishnappa Nayaka managed  the jagir for the general. After Mir Jumla's death in  1663 A.D., the jagir was given to Neknam Khan who managed it through  a representative, named Chintapalli Mirza. Sivaji, the celebrated Maratha  ruler, passed through the Kallur pass, near Tirupati, in 1676 A.D. while on  his way for the conquest of Ami, Vellore and Ginjee. Five years later, the  Golconda minister, Akkanna, was at Tirupati, trying to set matters right.  Aurangzeb, the son and successor of Shah Jaban, conquered the Qutub Shahi  kingdom and annexed it to the Mughal empire. With this the Camatic and  the Tirumala-Tirupati region, which was included in it, passed into the hands  of the Mughals.  

*Nawabs of Carnatic:*-This change of control created great confusion  in eastern Camatic. Many people fled to the English settlement for safety.  The Subedars of the Deccan exercised power over this region. Several Mughal  and Maratha armies ravaged this area. The Mughal emperor, Shah Alam I,  constituted the Carnatic into a separate Nawabi and appointed Sadatulla  Khan as its Nawab in 1710 A.D. This Nawab's adviser, Todar Mal, visited  Tirumala and set up there, statues of himself, his wife and his mother. Asaf Jba Nizam-ul-Mulk, the Mughal Subedar of the Deccan, began independent  rule in 1724 A.D. and claimed authority over the Nawabs of Carnatic. This  was also the time when the Peshwas became powerful in Maharashtra and  the Camatic soon came to be involved in the struggles between the Nizam  and the Peshwa. Asaf Jha appointed Dost Ali as Nawab of Carnatic in  1733 A.D. A Maratha army invaded this region under Raghoji, seven years  later, killed the Nawab in a pitched battle fought at Damalacheruvu, near  Tirumala, and looted the country around. The mother and the wife of  Baji Rao, the Peshwa, visited Tirumala about this time. Safdar Ali now  succeeded to the Nawabi. He paid fifty thousand rupees from the treasury  of the Tirumala temple, which was under his control and got rid of the  Marathas. Anwaruddin became the Nawab in 1744. Very soon, however,  the Nizam of Hyderabad and this Nawab of Carnatic died and their successors  started a war of succession. This was also the time when, in accordance  with a war declared between their home countries, the English and the French  started fighting in India. Mohammad Ali, son of Anwaruddm, who was  championed by the English for the Nawabi, sent two lakhs of rupees from  the treasury of the Tirumala temple to the English Commander, Clive, who  was besieged at Arcot.  

About 1750 A.D. he assigned the revenues of the Tirupati-Tirumala  temples to his allies and supporters, the English East India Company. The  next twenty years witnessed terrible disorder and confusion in the Tirupati  region. An adventurer, named Mahammad Kamal, ravaged this area but  was driven out by an army of the Company. The Zamindars of Venkatagiri,  Kalahasti and Karvetinagar, created trouble. Nazibullah, a brother of the  Nawab, advanced upon Tirupati and threatened it. Abdul Wahab, another  brother, followed his example. Both of them were repelled by the Company's  forces. Two Maratha generals, Gopalarao and Narayanarao, occupied the  Tirumala temple but were dislodged. Later, Hyder Ali, who usurped power  in Mysore, created trouble here. The Nizam and the Company had to fight  bitterly with Hyder and his son, Tippu. During the time of the Mysore  wars, the Company took over the management of the Carnatic.  


## TIRUMALA TEMPLE DURING THIS PERIOD.  

During this period Tirumala had been the scene of several struggles for  possessing the income derived from the offerings made to the shrine. The  revenues of Tirumala had for many years been paid to the ruler of the district  within which it was situated. The Nawab of Arcot,. Muhammad Ali, who  thus received nearly two lakhs annually, assigned this valuable source of  income to the English in consideration of the assistance rendered by them  in establishing his power in the Kamatak. In A.D. 1753, a chief named  Mohammed Kamal marched to Tirumala. This created alarm at Madras  where the authorities feared the loss of their revenue. A small force was  immediately sent but it was surrounded by Mahommed Kamal's troops upon  the plain of Tirupati itself and driven back with great loss. On the following  day reinforcements arrived and the issue of a battle was once more tried.  In the battle, the elephant, which carried Mahommed Kamal, was killed  and he was captured and executed on the spot.  

Io A.D. 1754, Mahammad Ali sought the assistance of the English to  coerce the tributaries and to levy fresh contributions. The polegars of  Srikalahasti and Karvetnagar whose estates lay in this district were among  those against whom English help was sought. They all submitted without  a struggle. In A.D. 1756, Nazibulla rose against his brother, Mahammad  Ali, and, retiring to the north, raided the territories of the polegars of  Srikalahasti and Karvetnagar. In August 1757, Nazibulla invested in the Nawab's  fort. Sensing his motive to acquire the offerings in the ensuing Brahmotsavam  festival at Tirumala, the detachment sent from Madras occupied the town  below the Tirumala hills. Being thus frustrated, Nazibulla retired from  the neighbourhood and turned back as many pilgrims as he met. Consequently,  the income of the temple for that year diminished considerably. In the same  year, the Kamatak again faced an invasion of the Marathas led by a general  named Balvanta Rao. He attacked Cuddapali and the Nawab Abdul Majid  Khan (A.D. 1753-1757), was killed in the fight. The latter was succeeded  by his uncle Mohsin Khan alias Mocha Miya. He concluded a treaty with  the Marathas, according to which, Gurramkonda was ceded to them. Balvanta  Rao next invested in the fortress of ' Cadapanattam ' which stands at the bead  of the  ‘Thallapullagbaut’ in Palmaner taluk. He also took Punganurpalem  after killing its polegar in a battle.  

In A.D. 1758, Tirupati was again threatened by Abdul Wahab, another  brother of the Nawab of Arcot. Abdul Wahab quarrelled with his brother  and fled to Chittoor with his mother and son. He maintained himself and a  small body of followers at Chittoor by collecting as much peshcush as he could  from the polegars of Chittoor. Later, he resolved on trying his fortune by  attacking Tirupati. Raising a considerable force he threatened the lower  town, but was deterred from making any decided attempt to plunder the temple  by rumours of the march of the English reinforcements. He, therefore,  retired and seized the fort of Chandragiri where he waited for a more favourable  opportunity. On his way from Hyderabad, the French general Bussy halted  at Tirupati, seized the Company's renter and intimidated him to resign the  revenues of the temple in his favour. Abdul Wahab joined Bussy at Tirupati  and accompanied him to the south under the impression that he would obtain  the grant of the revenues of Tirumala. He, however, failed in his expectation  and returned to Chandragiri. Again, in December 1758, a large body of  the Marathas led by Gopal Row marched to Tirupati, climbed the hills and  took possession of the temple in March 1759, to amass the income to be  received during the festival in April. As the main body of his force was  subsequently recalled, a small detachment under the command of a certain  Narayanasastri was left in charge of the temple. Abdul Wahab had driven  away this small force and reported his success to the Madras Government  with a request to farm the revenues of the temple to him. His application  was rejected and the previous renter was confirmed.  

Narayanasastri had returned to the palem of Karkambadi on the east  of the Tirupati range. In July 1759, he ascended the hills and reoccupied  the shrine with the assistance of the polegar of Karkambadi. A force was  sent to dislodge him, but it was driven back. An application for reinforcement  was sent to Madras and Major Calliaud, who commanded the English  reinforcements, decided on creating a diversion by attacking the stronghold  of the Karkambadi polegar. The village of Karkambadi was burnt and  its polegar was killed in the engagement that took place. This damped the  courage of the Marathas and their allies and the attack upon the temple on  the succeeding day was completely successful. Narayanasastri retreated  and the renter was reinstated. A small body of English troops was left to  protect the renter for a time. Tirupati was again the venue of a battle between  the forces of the Nizam, Nimm Ali Khan, and the Government of Madras.  The forces of the former, however, retreated and passed through Srikalahasti  in their precipitous flight towards Nellore.  

*Rule of the Company*:-After the Mysore wars, the Company tried to  restore order in the Carnatic. The successors of Mahammad Ali opposed it,  The Company forced the Nawab to retire on a pension and took over the  administration of this area in 1801 A.D. Not willing to undertake the  management of Hindu temples, the Company handed over the temples of  Tirumala-Tirupati to the Mahants in 1843 A.D.  

The Government of Madras took over the temples in 1933 A.D. and  put them under the management of a Board of Trustees. With the formation  of Andhra Pradesh, these temples came under the control of the government  of this new state.
