+++
title = "181"
+++
Devotees Bestow Grace by Their Own Free Will 
१८१ । ततः सत्सङ्गहेतुश्च सतां स्वैरचारितैव नान्यः । यथाह "त एकदा निमेः सत्रमुपजग्मुर्यदृच्छया” (भा० ११।२।२४) इति । 
CONSEQUENTLY, nothing other than the independent will of saints (the sat) can be the cause of sat-sanga, as Śrī Nārada said: "Once, by their own will, they [the sages] arrived at the sacrificial arena of King Nimi" (SB 11.2.24). 
ते नवयोगेश्वरा यदृच्छया स्वैरतया न तु हेत्वन्तरप्रयुक्ततयेत्यर्थः “यदृच्छा स्वैरिता” इत्य- 
मरः । 
The pronoun te, "they," refers to the nine sages known as the Nava-Yogeśvaras. The adverb yadṛcchaya means that they proceeded "by their own will" (svairataya), and not impelled by any other cause. The Amara-kosa (3.2.2) lexicon defines the word yadṛccha as "self-will" (svairită). 
सत्सु परमेश्वरप्रयोक्तृत्वं च सदिच्छानुसारेणैव । तदुक्तम् "स्वेच्छामयस्य" ( भा० १० | १४ | २) इति " अहं भक्तपराधीनः " ( भा० ९ ४ १६३) इति च ॥ श्रीनारदः || 
In regard to His authentic devotees (satsu), Parameśvara's impelling agency (prayoktṛtvam)2 functions exclusively in 
1ta ekadă nimeḥ satram upajagmur yadṛcchaya 
2 
By definition, the impelling agent (prayokta) of an action is independent of those who are impelled. His will functions independent of theirs, otherwise there would be no meaning to his being the impelling agent. Śrī Jīva points out, however, that in regard to His devotees, Paramesvara's impelling agency is → 
1119II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
accordance with their own will, as confirmed by Brahma: "[I cannot fathom the glories] of You, Bhagavan, who act according to the will of Your devotees" (SB 10.14.2). And Bhagavan Himself admitted: "I am completely under the control of My devotees" (SB 9.4.63).* 
Commentary 
FROM what was said in the previous anuccheda, it may be misconstrued that the grace of devotees is motivated by witnessing the suffering of others. This would imply that bhakti can be caused by something material. This, however, violates the principle that bhakti is untouched by anything material. Even if a devotee empathizes with a person and bestows his grace upon him, it is not motivated by that person's suffering. A devotee sees many people suffering around him, but he does not bless everyone. 
If suffering were the cause of receiving the blessings of a devotee, then everyone suffering in the material world should receive them. Moreover, if suffering were the cause, then those who are sättvika in nature, and hence relatively free from material suffering, would never be candidates for a devotee's blessings, being devoid of the cause on which their reception is based. 
An example here may help to illustrate the point. If somebody were drowning in a river and shouting for help, then a man passing by could decide to help the drowning person. But he would also be free not to help. If the call for help is thought to be the cause for saving the drowning man, then the man who saves him would have no choice but to do so. By definition, a cause is that which unfailingly leads to a particular effect. So here, the true cause for saving the drowning man is the independent will of the rescuer, and not 
subordinate to His devotees' will. This is to say that His will is prompted only by that of His devotees, leading to a reversal of roles, wherein "the impelled" (prayukta, i.e., the devotee) becomes "the impeller" (prayokta), and "the impeller" (Bhagavan) becomes "the impelled." 
> sveccha-mayasya 
• aham bhakta-paradhinaḥ 
1120 
181 Devotees Bestow Grace by Their Own Free Will 
the man's perilous condition or the call for help. Accordingly, the independent will of the devotee is the sole cause for the extension of grace. For this reason, Śrī Jīva says that the grace of a devotee does not depend on anything other than his own independent will. Thus, it is completely unpredictable. 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi points out that even Bhagavan's supreme will, or agency, is subordinate to the will of His devotees. Thus, it cannot be said that their bestowal of grace is controlled by Bhagavan. Bhagavan Himself is under the control of His devotees. Such is the play of love that the Supreme Controller Himself becomes controlled and vice versa. 
This dynamic is evidenced in the story of King Ambarīṣa, who was once visited by sage Durvāsā. The king received the sage with great honor. At the time, Ambarīṣa was observing the Ekādasi fast, and the moment for him to break his fast was imminent. So he invited the sage to be his guest of honor and accept food. The sage replied that he first needed to go to the river Yamuna to bathe and recite the Gayatri mantra before accepting food. So, the king waited for the sage to return from the river. 
It is a Vedic custom not to eat before feeding a guest. Durvāsā, however, became absorbed in his mantra-meditation and lost track of time. Ordinarily this would not have been an issue, but in this case, Ambarīṣa was about to complete his fast. An indispensable requirement of the fast was that it be broken within a specified time, and that period was coming to an end. 
The king naturally became anxious about the awkward turn of events. On the one hand, he did not wish to eat without first feeding his guest, and on the other, he needed to break the fast. On the advice of learned scholars of the sacred rites, he sipped a little water, which was sufficient to break his fast and yet did not amount to eating a meal or any solid food. 
Soon after, Durvāsā arrived, and by his yogic power, he could understand that the king had already consumed some form of food, however insignificant, without attending to him first. He felt insulted by the king's disregard for protocol and thus lost his temper. To teach the king a lesson, he extracted a hair from his 
1121 
II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
matted locks and dashed it on the ground. A ghastly looking fiery hobgoblin emerged from the hair and ran to devour the king. At once, Bhagavan Visnu's disc appeared on the spot to protect the king. The disc burnt the hobgoblin to ashes and then proceeded toward the sage. 
The sage was now terrified. He ran at the speed of mind to escape, but the disc would not abandon the chase. He flew off to the celestial realms of great devas, such as Brahma and Śiva, hoping to find someone who could protect him, but none of them had the power to ward off Bhagavan's own disc. They advised him that his only recourse was to approach Bhagavan Viṣṇu Himself, the master of the disc. 
So Durvāsā set off for Visņu's abode. But to his dismay, when he arrived there, Visņu admitted that He was powerless to take any action independent of His devotee's will. The verse cited at the end of this anuccheda was spoken by Him. In this verse, He informed Durvāsǎ that He is under the control of His devotees. As a final recourse, Durvāsā was compelled to petition Ambarīşa directly to be saved from otherwise certain death. In this case, it was evidenced that Bhagavan's own disc weapon was subordinate only to the will of His devotee, Ambarīṣa, and not even to that of Bhagavān Himself. 
1122 
