+++
title = "183"
+++
The Grace of a Devotee Is Not Dependent on Anything 
1 
१८३ । सतां कृपा च दुरवस्थादर्शनमात्रोद्भवा न स्वोपासनाद्यपेक्षा यथा श्रीनारदस्य नलकूबरमणिग्रीवयोः । तदाह ( भा० ११।२१६ ) - 
THE compassion (kṛpā) of authentic devotees (sat) is aroused merely on witnessing the miserable plight of living beings; it is not contingent on any service or supplication. This is exemplified in the case of Sri Narada's compassion upon Nalakuvara and Manigrīva. That a devotee's compassion is of such nature is supported by the words of Śri Vasudeva: 
भजन्ति ये यथा देवान् देवा अपि तथैव तान् । 
छायेव कर्मसचिवाः साधवो दीनवत्सलाः ॥ ५३४ ॥ 
The devas, who are subordinate to the law of karma, reward their worshipers like a shadow-only in proportion to the worship received from them. But true devotees (sadhus) are naturally compassionate toward the distressed (dina-vatsalāḥ). (SB 11.2.6)1 
स्पष्टम् ॥ श्रीमानानकदुन्दुभिः || 
The meaning of this statement is clear. 
bhajanti ye yathā devān deva api tathaiva tān 
chayeva karma-sacivaḥ sadhavo dina-vatsalaḥ 
1125 
II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
Commentary 
ŚRI JIVA GOSVĀMI continues to stress that the grace of a devotee is not influenced by anything external, such as praise or honor. It is not a businesslike return for services rendered. Usually when people want a favor from someone, they will go and flatter that person, which then impels him to offer help. Such is not the case with a devotee's grace. 
Again, it should not be misunderstood that the devotee's grace is effected only by seeing the miserable plight of the suffering living beings. In the previous two anucchedas, the examples of King Nimi and Citraketu were given. They were not in any miserable condition, but nevertheless they received the grace of the Navayogendras and the sage Angira respectively. 
In SB 11.2.6, Vasudeva contrasts the devotee with the devas. The devas bestow blessings only if they are worshiped, not independently. Moreover, the rewards they offer are proportional to the worship they receive, in the manner of a business transaction. The exchange between the devas and their worshipers is described by Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Arjuna: 
Nourish the devas through this yajña, and [by doing so] may the devas be gracious to you. Thus, through mutual benevolence, you shall attain the highest welfare. (GITĀ 3.11)2 
The mutual benevolence (parasparam bhavayantaḥ) mentioned here is in the form of offerings to the devas and the devas supplying the needs of the performers of yajña. In contrast to this, Vasudeva points out that the devotee's compassion is naturally aroused simply on witnessing the suffering of others. It is not dependent on the offering of service or worship. He therefore addresses them as dina-vatsala, or "compassionate toward the distressed." 
2 devan bhavayatanena te deva bhavayantu vaḥ 
parasparam bhavayantaḥ śreyaḥ param avāpsyatha 
1126 
