+++
title = "190"
+++
The Characteristics of a Neophyte Devotee 
१९० | अथ भगवद्धर्माचरणरूपेण कायिकेन किञ्चिन् मानसेन च लिङ्गेन कनिष्ठं लक्षयति ( भा० ११ ।२।४७ ) - 
Now sage Havi defines the neophyte devotee (kanişṭha) in terms of his physical traits (kāyika-linga) - which take the form of the outward behavior he exhibits in the matter of bhagavatdharma - and to a partial extent, in terms of his psychological disposition (mānasa-linga): 
अर्चायामेव हरये पूजां यः श्रद्धयेहते । 
न तद्भक्तेषु चान्येषु स भक्तः प्राकृतः स्मृतः ॥ ५४९ ।। 
One who offers worship to Hari with faith in the deity form alone but who fails to honor Him as present in His devotees or in other living beings is recognized as a präkṛta-bhakta, or a devotee whose nature [prakṛti] is in the very beginning stage of formation. (SB 11.2.47)1 
अर्चायां प्रतिमायामेव न तद्भक्तेषु अन्येषु च सुतरां न भगवत्प्रेमाभावाद् भक्तमाहात्म्यज्ञानाभावात् सर्वादरलक्षणभक्तगुणानुदयाच्च । स प्राकृतः प्रकृतिप्रारम्भोऽधुनैव प्रारब्धभक्तिरित्यर्थः । इयं च श्रद्धा न शास्त्रार्थावधारणजाता “यस्यात्मबुद्धिः कुणपे त्रिधातुके स्वधीः कलत्रादिषु भौम इज्यधीः । यत्तीर्थबुद्धिः सलिले न कर्हिचिज् जनेष्वभिज्ञेषु" (भा० १० १८४ । १३) इत्यादि शास्त्राज्ञानात् । 
This verse states that the neophyte devotee worships Bhagavān only in the form of the deity. He does not perceive Bhagavan's 
1 
arcayam eva haraye püjām yaḥ śraddhayehate 
na tad-bhakteşu canyesu sa bhaktah prakṛtah smrtah 
1179II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
presence in His devotees and, consequently, certainly not in others either. This is because, within his being, there is an absence of the appearance of love for Bhagavan, an absence of awareness of the glory of true devotees, and an absence of the appearance of a devotee's fundamental quality, which is the attitude of reverence for all living beings. Such a person is a prākṛta-bhakta, "a devotee whose nature (prakṛti) is in the very beginning stage of formation (prarambha)," meaning that his cultivation of bhakti has just recently begun. Additionally, his śraddha, or faith, is not the outcome of assimilating the import of scripture. This attitude is characterized in the following statement: 
One whose self-concept (atma-buddhih) is rooted in this corpselike body, which is constituted of the three elements, mucus, bile, and air; whose sense of relation (sva-dhih) is in his wife, children, and other kin; whose concept of divinity (ijya-dhih) is in earthen images; and whose notion of the sacred (tirthabuddhiḥ) is in the water of a river; but who never cherishes the sense of self, of relation, of divinity, and of the sacred, in regard to those who have realized the Absolute, is indeed an ass among cows. (SB 10.84.13)2 
These attitudes are due to ignorance of the scriptural conclusions. 
तस्माल्लोकपरम्पराप्राप्तैवेति पूर्ववत् । अतश्चाजातप्रेमा शास्त्रीयश्रद्धायुक्तः साधकस्तु मुख्यः कनिष्ठो ज्ञेयः ॥ 
Consequently, the faith of the neophyte arises only out of social conventions (loka-paramparā), as described earlier. Thus, a spiritual practitioner (sadhaka) in whom divine love (prema) has not yet manifested but who is endowed with faith rooted in scriptural knowledge is to be understood as the primary standard of a neophyte devotee (kanistha). 
2 
yasyatma-buddhiḥ kunape tri-dhatuke sva-dhiḥ kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih yat-tirtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij janesv abhijñesu sa eva go-kharah 
1180 
190 The Characteristics of a Neophyte Devotee 
Commentary 
EARLIER it was said that śraddha is the primary prerequisite for bhakti. This śraddha can arise either from the customs and beliefs of one's own cultural environment (laukika-śraddha) or from a systematic study of sastra (sastriya-śraddha). In India, it is generally seen that in every area or village, some particular deity is worshiped. The people who are native to a given place naturally tend to be devoted to the deity present there, since they observe the deity's worship being conducted by their seniors from their very childhood. They also participate in local festivals related to that deity. All this creates firmly reinforced impressions (samskaras) in their minds, and when they grow up, they also continue the tradition of worshiping that deity. 
Over time, this tradition becomes an established social convention (loka-parampara). If a community member does not conform to the local convention, he feels divorced from his community. This naturally creates a problem in his social life. It is thus seen that in different parts of India, people predominantly worship either Krsna, Rāma, Ganesa, Śiva, Kālī, or numerous other deities in accordance with whichever deity's worship is popular in their area. These worshipers have almost no knowledge of sastra. They simply follow what others before them have done. 
The same of course applies to the practitioners of other religions, such as Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism, and so on. When religious practice is rooted in conventional faith alone (laukika-śraddha), it has no basis in knowledge of either scripture or theology. As a result, it tends to be weak and prone to counter-arguments and the loss of faith. 
The second type of śraddha (sastriya-śraddha) is that which ensues from hearing and studying sastra under the guidance of a qualified devotee. This is the śraddha that forms the basis of the three types of eligible bhaktas defined in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.17-19) Such bhaktas are very rare. 
3 tatra uttamah -> 
1181 
11 How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
At present, a third category of śraddha has become prevalent, namely, the faith that ensues from religious proselytization. Practitioners who acquire such faith take to the path of bhakti (or any other religion) due to the influence of indoctrination. It is generally the case that such practitioners have not studied the sastra in an authentic manner, but they are not completely ignorant of it like the first group. 
Most bhaktas at present belong to the first and third groups. Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi comments that the primary standard of a neophyte is one whose śraddha is based upon sastra. He is described in Bhaktirasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.19) as follows: "One whose [śastriya-] śraddhā is weak (komala) is determined to be a neophyte (kanistha)." 
In commenting on the latter verse, Śrī Jīva writes that the neophyte is not particularly skilled in arguing on the basis of sastra, and thus it is possible for an opponent to refute him by presenting arguments contrary to bhakti. This, however, does not mean that the neophyte will give up the path, because he is endowed nonetheless with the beginning stage of authentic faith. He may feel disturbed for some time by the opponent's counter-arguments, but he will fix his mind once again on bhakti. 
The type of neophyte described by Havi is of a lower or even more basic category. His faith extends only to Bhagavan's presence in the deity but not to that of His presence in other living beings, including the devotees. This is due to the fact that his vision has not been informed and transformed through a systematic study of śāstra. 
The neophyte defined in the above cited verse from Bhaktirasāmṛta-sindhu is superior to the neophyte defined in the principal verse of this anuccheda. The former has respect for devotees and will also be predisposed to feel Bhagavan's presence in other beings, even though the immediate experience of such is lacking 
sastre yuktau ca nipunah sarvatha drdha-niscayah praudha-śraddho'dhikari yaḥ sa bhaktāv uttamo mataḥ tatra madhyamaḥ 
yaḥ sastrādiṣv anipunaḥ śraddhavan sa tu madhyamah tatra kanisthah - 
yo bhavet komala-śraddhaḥ sa kanistho nigadyate 
1182 
190 The Characteristics of a Neophyte Devotee 
in him. He will strive to adhere to sastra, although he may not always be successful in this attempt. In comparison, a madhyamabhakta has a deeper level of respect for devotees, because he is well acquainted with the glory of Bhagavan, bhakti, and the bhakta. He also knows that disrespecting devotees is displeasing to Bhagavan. For these reasons, he establishes friendship (maitri) with them. 
In the principal verse of this anuccheda (SB 11.2.47), the neophyte devotee is defined both in terms of his physical and psychological characteristics. The neophyte's worship of the deity is a physical characteristic, and the śraddha that impels such worship is a psychological trait. 
1183 
Symptoms of the Superlative Devotee 
Anucchedas 191-198 
