+++
title = "194"
+++
The Uttama-bhāgavata Is Devoid 
of Material Ego 
१९४ । तथा ( भा० ११।२ ।५१ ) - 

ŚRI HAVI continues to describe the uttama-bhāgavata in the next 
verse: 
न यस्य जन्मकर्मभ्यां न वर्णाश्रमजातिभिः । सज्जतेऽस्मिन्नहम्भावो देहे वै स हरेः प्रियः ॥ ५५४ ॥ 
One whose sense of identity (aham-bhāva) is never invested in the body on the basis of birth (janma), deeds (karma), vocation (varna), stage of life (asrama), or caste (jāti), is certainly dear to Bhagavan Hari. (SB 11.2.51)1 
जन्म सत्कुलम् । कर्म तपआदि । जातयोऽनुलोमजा मूर्धाभिषिक्तादयः । 
The word janma means "birth in a noble family" (sat-kula), and karma refers to virtuous deeds, such as undergoing penance (tapa). The word jāti refers to the congenial suband mixed castes (anulomajā), such as the mixed brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya caste (murdhābhiṣikta)? 
1 
2 
na yasya janma-karmabhyam na varnasrama-jātibhiḥ 
sajjate sminn aham-bhavo dehe vai sa hareh priyah 
Anuloma is a term used in the Smrti texts to describe mixed castes wherein the 
father is of a higher caste than the mother. According to Manu-smrti 10.5, the word jāti refers to the anuloma, or "congenial," castes. The word murdhabhiṣikta (as well as the term brahma-kṣatra) refers to an anuloma mixed caste wherein 
1194 
194 The Uttama-bhagavata Is Devoid of Material Ego 
एताभिर्यस्यास्मिन् देहेऽहम्भावो न सज्जते किन्तु भगवत्सेवौपयिके साध्ये एव देहे सज्जत इत्यर्थः स हरेः प्रियो भागवतोत्तम इति पूर्वेणान्वयः प्रकरणार्थत्वात् । हरेः प्रिय इति भागवतमात्रवाचि भागवतत्वादेव || 
One whose sense of identity (aham-bhāva) is never invested in the body on the basis of these various factors, but [whose authentic "I-consciousness" (aham-bhava)] is related to the body only inasmuch as it is an instrument for serving Bhagavän, is dear to Bhagavan Hari. This is the sense. In accordance with the definitions given in the previous verses, the statement here that such a devotee is dear to Bhagavan Hari means that he is an uttama-bhāgavata, because this is the topic of this section. He is dear to Bhagavan Hari specifically because of his actually having the essential nature of a superlative devotee (i.e., his bhāgavatatva), on which basis alone he is designated as a bhāgavata. 
Commentary 
BECAUSE the uttama-bhāgavata is wholly absorbed in Bhagavan, and because his authentic sense of identity (aham-bhava) is as a servant of Bhagavan, he is unidentified with the body on the basis of birth, education, or social status. He regards the body only as an instrument for the service of Bhagavan. 
Identification with the body occurs in the absence of awareness of Bhagavan. The uttama-bhagavata, however, is continuously absorbed in remembrance of Bhagavan, as mentioned two verses earlier in SB 11.2.49. On this account, he is not influenced by Bhagavān's māyā. Moreover, since he constantly remembers Bhagavān, who is supreme above all, there is no possibility of his feeling proud of anything. But the uttama-bhāgavata's absence of pride in 
the father is a brahmana and the mother, a ksatriya. According to Manu-smrti, people of this caste are to be treated as equal to brahmanas. Parasurama is a classical example of a person from the murdhabhiṣikta mixed caste. For more on this topic, see Yajnavalkya-smṛti 1.91, etc. In a different context, the word murdhabhişikta is used to refer to a king who has been consecrated on the throne. Jiva Gosvāmī takes the first meaning as applicable here. 
1195 
II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
regard to nobility of birth, erudition, and so on does not mean that he is unaware of his own qualifications in these various regards. He simply remains unidentified with them. 
Neophyte devotees, on the other hand, may be considerably proud of taking birth in a pure family or a famous lineage. They often brag about such things. It is due to pride rooted in bodily identification that neophytes do not respect other devotees, as pointed out earlier by Havi. What this means is that they may even make a show of respect externally, but within, they feel only the inflation of their own ego. Offering respect in the true sense means to feel oneself as lower than the person to whom respect is offered. 
1196 
