+++
title = "206"
+++
The Śravana-guru and Sikṣā-guru Are Generally the Same Person 
२०६ । अथ श्रवणगुरुभजनशिक्षागुर्वोः प्रायिकमेकत्वमिति तथैवाह (भा० ११।३।२२) - 
THE śravaṇa-guru and the bhajana-šikṣā-guru are generally the same person, as sage Prabuddha indicated to King Nimi: 
तत्र भागवतान् धर्मान् शिक्षेद् गुर्वात्मदैवतः । अमाययानुवृत्त्या यैस्तुष्येदात्मात्मदो हरिः ॥ ६१८ || 
In his presence [i.e., the śravana-guru described in the previous verse], the aspirant who regards his guru as his very self and worshipful object, should learn, by way of unpretentious continuous service, the dharma that pertains directly to Bhagavan, by which [dharma] Śrī Hari, the Supreme Immanent Self, who awards even His own Self [to His devotees], becomes pleased. (SB 11.3.22)2 
" तस्माद् गुरुं प्रपद्येत " ( भा० ११ । ३ । २१) इति पूर्वोक्तस्तत्र श्रवणगुरौ । गुरुरेव आत्मा जीवनं दैवतं निजेष्टदैवततयाभिमतश्च यस्य तथाभूतः सन् । अमायया निर्दम्भयानुवृत्त्या तदनुगत्या शिक्षेत् । 
2 
As seen below, this is Śri Jiva Gosvāmis gloss on the pronoun tatra, lit., "in that matter," referring to the guru described in the immediately preceding verse (tasmad gurum prapadyeta), cited in Anuccheda 202.4. Śri Viraraghavacārya and other commentators gloss the same word as guru-sannidhau, "in the presence of such a guru." 
tatra bhagavatan dharman sikşed gurv-atma-daivataḥ amāyayanuvṛttyä yais tusyed atmatma-do hariḥ 
1297 
II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
The pronoun tatra refers to the śravana-guru, who was described in the preceding verse, "tasmad gurum prapadyeta" (SB 11.3.21). The compound gurv-atma-daivataḥ refers to the aspirant, who is of such disposition (tatha-bhūtah) that he regards his guru alone as his very self (ātmā), meaning "his veritable life" (jivanam), and as his worshipful object (daivata), meaning "his worshipful deity" (nija-işța-daivata). Such an aspirant should learn (sikset) by way of unpretentious (amāyaya) continuous service (anuvṛttyä). Here, the word amāyaya means "unduplicitous" (nirdambhaya), and the word anuvṛttyä means "by following him obediently" (tad-anugatya). 
यैर्धर्मैः । आत्मा परमात्मा । भक्तेभ्य आत्मप्रदः श्रीबलिप्रभृतिभ्य इव । अस्य शिक्षागुरोबहुत्वमपि प्राग्वज् ज्ञेयम् ॥ श्रीप्रबुद्धो निमिम् ॥ 
The pronoun yaiḥ, "by which," means "by which dharma" (dharmaiḥ) [Śrī Hari becomes pleased]. The word ātmā, “Self,” means "Paramātmā, the Supreme Immanent Self." [The word atma-daḥ] means "He who awards even His own Self to His devotees, such as Śrī Bali and others." As mentioned previously, one can have numerous such sikṣā-gurus. 
Commentary 
THE ŚRAVANA-GURU is the teacher from whom one learns the śästra, and the bhajana-siksa-guru is the one who teaches practical aspects of sadhana-bhakti. Usually these two will be the same, because the teacher from whom one begins to study will naturally become one's guide for spiritual practice. It is preferable that they be the same person, otherwise there can be confusion in the mind of the student. 
If the student hears different opinions from two different teachers, he or she will be in difficulty, because the words of one of them will have to be disregarded, which could lead to an offense. If both these gurus belong to the same spiritual tradition, then there may not be any difference in their teachings, otherwise there is bound 
1298 
206 The Śravana-guru and Sikṣā-guru Are Generally the Same Person 
to be some disparity. One sometimes hears of Vaisnavas in Vṛndavana who held respect for seniors or gurus on both sides of a controversy and who hid themselves so that they would not have to take sides, fearing that to do so would offend one of them. 
The guru-disciple relationship is one of the most important and unique aspects of Indian society. Indeed, this one sacred bond is what makes Indian society distinct in the whole world. Although at present there is little or no training in this honored tradition, it still runs very deep in the Indian psyche, as if it is in their genes. Its importance can be understood only by experiencing it. 
For the modern mind, it appears as if the disciple sacrifices his independence to become a slave of the guru. The modern mind cannot understand that the only way transcendental knowledge can be transmitted is from the heart of the guru into that of the disciple. It is not simply a matter of attending a lecture in a classroom where a teacher speaks and then goes away. The disciple and teacher remain bound to each other. When the relation is pure, then the teaching is transmitted even without words. It is as if their hearts become linked up, and the knowledge is transferred through this bond. 
Indian history is filled with stories of this pristine relation, from the age of the Upanisads through to modern times. In this regard, Svetasvatara Upanisad makes the following assertion: 
The imports of the teachings described in this Upanisad are revealed only to that elevated soul in whom transcendental devotion for Bhagavan is present and who feels the same quality of devotion for his guru as felt for Bhagavan. (SU 6.23)3 
The verse cited in this anuccheda (SB 11.3.22) is spoken by sage Prabuddha. It contains the most important instruction for a sincere disciple. In the immediately preceding verse, cited in Anuccheda 202.4, Prabuddha specified the essential characteristics of a qualified guru. In this verse, he elaborates those of the sincere disciple. 
3 
yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau 
tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahātmanah 
1299II How Akiñcana-bhakti Is Attained 
The first criterion mentioned is that the student should study bhāgavata-dharma, or bhakti, from the guru. Bhakti is not something to be understood by reading books or articles on the internet. One must study it from an authentic guru. This is an injunction, as indicated by use of the optative form of the verb, tatra sikşet, "the aspirant must learn in the presence of his guru." There is no alternative course of action. The second criterion is that this study must be undertaken by way of rendering continuous service to the guru (anuvṛttyä). Moreover, this service must be done without any duplicity or pretension (amāyaya). In this regard, Kṛṣṇa makes the following statement: 
I, the Immanent Self of all beings, am not as pleased with daily sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerities, or renunciation, as I am by service to the guru. (SB 10.80.34)* 
In support of the same conclusion, Narada instructed Yudhisthira that one can attain perfection simply by service to a qualified guru (SB 7.15.25). On the other hand, if one disrespects the guru, he cannot achieve anything spiritually (SB 7.15.26). The guru is the key, the doorway to the spiritual world, as well as the companion in the spiritual world. For these reasons, one must treat the guru with respect and love. 
The compound gurv-atma-daivatah is very important. This is a reference to the aspirant, mentioned in the previous verse, who is profoundly inquisitive about the ultimate good (jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam). The compound signifies that the genuine aspirant is one who regards his guru as his very self (ātmā) and worshipful object (devatā). A nearly identical expression was employed in the very first anuccheda of this book, namely, guru-devatātmā (SB 11.2.37). 
4 
The word ātmā is used here in the sense of the object of pure, unconditional love. One should love the guru as one would love God, or Kṛṣṇa. Just as nothing can remain hidden from one's own ātmā, so too the same dynamic applies in regard to one's guru. This gives rise to a deep sense of unity. There should be a oneness of 
* näham ijyä-prajätibhyam tapasopasamena ca 
tuşyeyam sarva-bhūtātmā guru-suśruṣaya yathā 
1300 
206 The Śravana-guru and Siksa-guru Are Generally the Same Person 
heart between the guru and the disciple. The disciple needs to attune his or her heart with the heart of the guru, as stated in Ṛg Veda: "May your intention be one and the same, your hearts united, your 
minds of one accord, so that intimate companionship may be yours" (RV 10.191.4)5 This is the significance of the word ātmā. It also means that one should be like an open book in front of the guru. 
The second word is daivatam, meaning that the guru is to be regarded in the same spirit as one's worshipful deity. If one feels only love without a sense of reverence, then one may not take instructions from the guru. One may become too familiar with him. For this reason, the sage says daivatam - one must honor the guru in the same manner as one's worshipable deity. One should never think of the guru as an ordinary human being, guruşu naramatiḥ. In other words, the disciple has to have both moods with the guru, aiśvarya and madhurya, reverence and intimacy. When one serves the guru in this way, Kṛṣṇa is pleased. Krsna is referred to here as atma-daḥ, "He who gives Himself to His devotees." When Kṛṣṇa was pleased with Bali's surrender, He gave Himself to Bali and became his doorkeeper. This signifies that when the guru is pleased, Kṛṣṇa is also pleased. 
5 
samāni va akūtiḥ samana hṛdayāni vaḥ 
samānam astu vo mano yatha vah susahāsati 
6 
Padyavali 114 
1301 
