+++
title = "208"
+++
Knowledge of Scriptural Truth Is Received Only from the Śravaṇa-guru 
२०८ । तत्र श्रवणगुरुसंसर्गेणैव शास्त्रीयविज्ञानोत्पत्तिः स्यान् नान्यथेत्याह (भा० ११।१०।१२) - 
AMONG them [the śravana-guru, sikṣā-guru, and mantra-guru], it is specifically by contact with the śravana-guru that the immediate intuition of scriptural truths can manifest, and not otherwise, as stated by Śrī Kṛṣṇa: 
आचार्योऽरणिराद्यः स्यादन्तेवास्युत्तरारणिः । तत्सन्धानं प्रवचनं विद्यासन्धिः सुखावहः || ६२२ ॥ 
The ācārya is the lower piece of wood used for kindling a fire (adya-arani); the disciple is the upper piece of wood (uttaraarani); instruction is the middle piece of wood used as a churning rod (tat-sandhanam);' and knowledge is their union, which confers delight. (SB 11.10.12)2 
आद्योऽधरः । तत्सन्धानं तयोर्मध्यमं मन्थनकाष्ठम् । प्रवचनमुपदेशः । विद्या शास्त्रोक्तं ज्ञानं तु सन्धौ भवोऽग्निरिव । 
1 Śrīdhara Svāmī, Visvanatha Cakravarti, and all other commentators have 
glossed the compound tat-sandhanam, lit., "their point of contact," as tayor madhyamam manthana-kastham, "the churning rod placed between these two." ācāryo'ranir adyah syad antevasy uttararaniḥ 
tat-sandhanam pravacanam vidya sandhiḥ sukhāvahaḥ 
1306 
208 Knowledge of Scriptural Truth Is Received Only from the Śravana-guru 
The word adyaḥ, lit., "the first," means the lower piece of wood used for kindling a fire (adharaḥ aranih). The compound tatsandhanam, lit., "their contact point," means "the churning rod placed between these two" (tayor madhyamam manthanakäṣṭham). The word pravacanam, "spoken discourse," means "oral instruction" (upadeśa). The word vidya, "knowledge," refers to the knowledge disclosed in scripture, which is manifested out of the union of these three, just as fire is generated by the contact of the lower, upper, and middle pieces of wood. 
तथा च श्रुतिः “आचार्यः पूर्वरूपम्" ( तै०१।३१३) इत्यादि । 
A similar statement is found in the Śruti: 
Now with regard to knowledge: The acarya is the prior form, the disciple, the posterior; knowledge, their junction; and instruction, the medium. (TU 1.3.3)3 
अत एव "तद्विज्ञानार्थं स गुरुमेवाभिगच्छेत्” (मु०११२।१२) इति । “आचार्यवान् पुरुषो वेद" ( छा० ६ । १४ । २) इति । 
Therefore, the Śruti makes the following statements [regarding the necessity of receiving knowledge from a guru]: 
To obtain immediate realization of the Supreme Reality, one should certainly approach a guru. (MUU 1.2.12)* 
One who has accepted an ācārya becomes acquainted with the Absolute. (CHU 6.14.2)5 
3 
+ 
athadhi-vidyam acaryah purva-rupam antevâsy uttara-rupam 
vidya sandhiḥ pravacanam sandhanam iti adhi-vidyam 
⚫ tad-vijñānārtham sa gurum evabhigacchet 
5 
ācāryavan puruso veda 
1307 
II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
" नैषा तर्केण मतिरापनेया प्रोक्तान्येनैव सुज्ञानाय प्रेष्ठ ” ( कठ०१।२ । ९) इति ॥ श्रीभगवान् ॥ 
And: 
O dearest one, this wisdom pertaining to the Absolute cannot be obtained by logic. Only when knowledge is received from a guru does it lead to the true understanding. (Katha Upanisad 1.2.9) 
Commentary 
IN FORMER TIMES, the fire required to perform yajña was produced by churning wood of the sami tree. This wood was called arani. To start the fire, friction was created between a lower piece of wood, an upper piece, and a churning rod in the center. Since at the time in question, match boxes were not available, there was no other way of producing fire. In the same manner, there is no other way of obtaining knowledge except by approaching a guru. 
In this analogy, the guru is compared to the base piece of wood, the student, to the top piece of wood, and the instruction received from the teacher, to the churning rod, since it churns the mind of the student. The knowledge generated in the student from this union is compared to fire. Just as fire was used to perform yajña, so too the knowledge received from an authentic guru leads one to the ultimate goal. 
One may object that knowledge can be obtained by one's own initiative simply by reading books. These days, most books are available in print form or on the internet. There are also audio and video lectures available. The guru was formerly needed when these were nonexistent. So, just as match boxes or lighters are now the convenient way to ignite a fire, making the need to churn wood obsolete, so too there is no longer any need to seek knowledge from a guru. So why take the trouble to do so? 
6 
In response to this doubt, Śrī Jīva cites the principal verse of this anuccheda to affirm the absolute necessity for taking a guru. The 
naisā tarkena matir äpaneya proktänyenaiva sujñānāya prestha 
1308 
208 Knowledge of Scriptural Truth Is Received Only from the Sravana-guru 
practice of churning wood to generate a fire was not just because match boxes or lighters did not exist in the past, but because it was an essential part of the injunction to execute the yajña. A yajña has to be performed in the precise manner prescribed to attain the desired result. If any detail is altered, then it will not yield the desired result. In Mahabharata (Vana-parva, chapter 135), there is a story to illustrate the necessity of learning from a guru. 
There was a brāhmaṇa boy named Yavakrīta, who refused to attend the traditional school, called a gurukula, where students go to live with a guru. When he grew up, he realized that he could not function as a brahmana without an education. On this basis, he decided that he must somehow obtain knowledge. But at this point, he did not want to go to a teacher, because he would feel somewhat ashamed to be with much younger students. He heard that it was possible to obtain anything by observing penances. So he went deep into the forest and engaged in severe penances in the hope of acquiring knowledge. Many years passed, but there was still no result. 
One day, Yavakrīta went to the nearby river to take a dip, and there he saw an old man sitting and pouring sand from the bank into the river with his hands. Yavakrīta became curious to know what the old man was trying to achieve. He approached him and asked him why he was pouring sand into the river. The old man replied in all seriousness, "I need to cross the river. I do not know how to swim, and there are no boats available, so I have decided to build a bridge across it." 
When the young brahmana heard this, he could not control his laughter. The old man asked him, "What is so funny? Do you think there is an easier way to cross the river?" Yavakrīta replied, "I am laughing at your ignorance. You cannot build a bridge by pouring sand into the water. Any fool knows this much." 
At this, the old man retorted, "If you think you can obtain knowledge without approaching a guru, then I can also build a bridge in this way. I will do it by my own effort." The brāhmaṇa was shocked to hear this. Then the old man revealed his identity as Indra, who had appeared there out of compassion for the brahmana. 
1309II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
Indra then asked him to find a qualified guru and study the Vedas 
from him. 
1310 
