+++
title = "04"

+++
THEN ENTER KAMA AND VASANTA. 
Kama. Friend Vasanta ! 
1. Sugar-cane so tender for my bow, 
yon flowers for my shafts,. 
Bee-swarm humming sweet harp's 
melody for my bow-string, 
Fair sex, timid and weak, for my 
battalion ; all these true. 
With these aids tender, of my own 
will, prosper I-the conquerer 
of the Trident-wearer.' 
Further: 
1. With missiles and shafts, by thee 
2. Siva. 
granted,208 
And with thee for my help ever 
See how Móha great wieldeth, 
unfailing, 
The universe under one umbrella.' 
Vasanta.-What sayest thou? Thou art Kama 
indeed! 
1. Through prescribed and proscribed 
Karmas with their senses performed, Longing for some results, the 
savants awakened, 
To thee of infinite marvel, impute they, 
Their deeds, saying "Kāma did 
them and Manyu2 did them". 
1. With Siva and others, thy sportive 
With 
Thy free diversion-resorts are Dēva- 
battles thou didst have, 
chief's mansions, 
earth, 
Thy pleasure-park is this sea-girt 
Ah Madana! How to describe thee, the 
splendour's ocean P 
1. The meaning is that the whole world is under 
Mōba's Lord paramountcy 
1. Anger. cf. amisaafa #egranoffa. 
209 
Kama.Friend! Just think of thy greatness 
known all the world over. 
1. 
2. 
For 
Well-known it is that the origin of Sumanas1 is thyself; the whole universe delighteth in thee; thou art indeed the foremost of the thrice-two seasons ; Jótis entirely doth depend on thee; Madhava" where Sri doth dwell, bearing Pankaja, is all thy own and Kama is thy minister. What other better season is there that 
with thee? 
Besides 
can match 
1. Thou art the Fire named Vasanta; this Malaya zephyr is thy charioteer; Asóka 
Two meanings in 4 to 7:- 
Devas-Flowers. 
1. Sacrifice (fin), and Para-Brahman. 
2. 
3. 
Vishnu, month of Vaisakha. 
Lakshmi living in the Lotus Tank-Loveliness 
of Lotus Tank. 
1. 
Malaya mountain. 
1. S. 14 
210 
ani other flowers, thy flames; bee-swarms, the array of smoke; nectar-born moon,. the feeding fluid; therefore the tree of Virakti' of the Creator, Siva and other, is burnt away by thee, who hast wiped away even the name of Santi.? 
Vasante. --Great 
warrior and 
fish-bannered Kāma! The greatness of persons like myself is entirely of thy making. 
For: 
1. The seasons, of whom I am the chief, are the artists granting thee thy diverse weapons. The Moon and the Sun bepoken thy time of victory and rest,“ 
Kama. Enough of this abundancy of mutual 
Kama..........Enough 
belauding! State business should first be attended to. 
Vasanta.—I shall act, my friend ! as thou dost bid. Of one bent of mind as we are, the 
5 
duty of enkindling the sentiment of 
1. See n 2. p 166. 
2. Day. 
3. Peace. 3. Night time. 
4. चंद्रोदय मारुतकोकिलालापादि । 
211 
providing all the ways and means of sexual love in Jiva, now engaged in the practice of Yoga, shall be mine exclusively, and that of thine the wherewithal to provide suitable objects of love. 
Kama. --Comrade! I shall act up to thy wishes. Jiva, whose meditation of the blessed Lord is but recent, could easily be turned away, by holding up before him the allurements of ephemeral pleasures, accustomed to which he has been all along. Is there not this Brahman for him, 
(for him, viz.,)—the fair-eyed damsels, themselves the end and aim of all ambition, visible indee"] to the eye of all Beings, the Dēvas, the Asuras, the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the Vidyadharas," the Kinnaras, the Kimpurushas and the Mānushas-all ? 
1. युवत्यादि । 
2. 
Divine bards 
1. Celestial musicians. 
4 & 5. Mythical beings with human figures and 
horse-heads. 
1. Human beings. 
212 
Think not that this is improper :- 
1. Why could not the damsels, who minister to the exquisite of pleasures aljo› who are the cause of the procreation of the universe, be called Brahman, in so far as they do possess the Brahman's attributes ? Vasanta. -Friend ! This, thine opinion, is borne out by chapter and verse in the Upanishads, for quoth they (Upanishads) that damsels alone are the Brahman. say that Brahman is a male is but complimentary twaddle. 
To 
1. Youthful maidens' sidelooks bashful 
and lovely, 
And their amorous tricks (or play), 
adorned most in their unadorned 
simplicity, 
Even the best Yogis, captivate, 
Even Eternal Brahman-a hundred- 
rejecting! 
1. The two principal attributes of Brahman are- 
मोक्षप्रदत्वं = Grant of salvation; जगत्कारणत्वं creative 
cause of the Universe. 
1. स्त्रियो हि ब्रह्मोतवा पुमान् । 
213 
Kama.-(With joy) Dear Vasanta! What thou 
savest is true indeed. 
For 
1.  This assemblage of celestial nymphs, whose looks make one mistake them for ranks of arrows, shall now, 
under my 
commands, go a-dancing and anon capture Jiva, albeit so intent on attaining Peace beyond works (L.e. Brahman). 
Vasanta. Flower-shafted friend! So long 
-W 
as the fair sex is under thy dispensation, our mission is as good as fulfilled. 
Now : 
1.  With ears made merry by the honey of melodious music, with eyes 
carried away by rapturous dance and with heart enslaved by diverse emotions erotic, the mind' of Yōgis cau never decline from the bevy of blooming damsels, 
Kama. --(Pondering and with a sardonic smile). 
1. Resolve not to give up Yoga. 
12/ 
214 
Should, disregarding me, Vivēkaproud in the company of Vyavasaya' and others, would yet fight with me, he himself should bring about the fate of Saubhag captivated by a hundred damsels. 
Vasanta. --No wonder! For, renowned indeed 
are thy valorous deeds! 
1.  The merry she cuckoos, (as if they were)-the musical instruments of Panava,3 Vēnu Vīnù3, etc.-ever sing the valor of thee, blossom-bowed Cupid, that hath the bow-string made up of the swarm of bees, delirious with the drink of honey, flowing from the blossoming Kalpaka blooms 'that make thy bow! 
2. Application. 
3. 
A sage named Saubhari, while penancing in the midst of water, beheld a fish, surrounded by its offspring. Enamoured of this, he gave up the ponance, bimself longing to enjoy a similar happiness and married the hundred daughters of Māndhāta for the purpose. (See Vishau Purāns). 
1. A kind of musical instrument. 
2. Flute. 
3. Harp. 
215 
Hence thou needst use not much effort to accomplish such a simple task. 
; 
1.  Bend not in vain thy bow whose flower-shafts never yet missed their aim fill not thy bow-string with the lovely flower-arrows. Friend! Even at the mere eight of thy weapons--the flowers-brought by me into existence and laid in reserve by hundreds in thy quiver-the trees' branches,--quiver indeed shall Vivéka. 
Kama. This sort of mild enthusiasm will not 
do in the matter of a mighty foe. 
For: 
1.  Doth not the sun rise with a full 
thousand rays to dispel the darkness which could (though) be dissipated even by a little light? 
1.  Set aside the story of fight; for have not the poets chronicled that indescribable misfortunes have attended persons who allowed themselves to be slighted, even 
216 
in a small measure, as in (stories of) gambling' and verbal debates2. 
Vasanta.—How is it that thou, though holding the whole universe under thy grip, underrate thy own greatness and anticipate the slightest slight from any person whatsoever ? 
A thousand locusts cannot screen the thousand-rayed sun! 
1.  So long as thy army is active, with its infantry-the charmning beauty of lovely women, its cavalry-their amorous gait, its elephant-division-delirium from draughts of wine, and its chariot-division-sexual enjoyment, who with any regard for Yoga can ever remain alive ? 
Now the Jiva hath not yet scaled up to the high pinnacle of Yoga. Such being the case, why for no reason doubtest thou that we shall not achieve our object! 
1. Vide the chronicle of Dharmaputra and Nala. 
2. 
15 
Sisupala. 
217 
For it is found :- 
1.  That the Jiva, aware as he is of the pit-falls of Samsara, doth still long for the same; though he speaketh of the attainment of Brahman, still he doth hanker after mundane prosperity; though he yearneth for the Ocean of Joy, he doth at the same time shamelessly shrink. Therefore the Yoga of the Jiva in such a dilemum, could with very little effort be frustrated. 
Kama. · Thou seemest to hint that the best opportunity to slay the Jiva is this, while asleep. 
1.  Most opportune therefore is this time for me to exhaust all (my) weapons on the Jiva who hath not yet completed his Yoga, 
-like Arjuna attacking 
attacking Karnā, when the latter felt abashed at seeing his chariot slightly sunk in earth! 
Vasanta. -Very well. If thou dost so, thy 
efforts shall sure with success be crowned. 
1. Vide Karna parva of Mahābhārata.218 
20: The person, who hath solely set his heart on tumbling into the mire of Yoga, that could not dry by ever So many sins, owing to Virakti's fraudulent ways, shall yet have all his Nirvēda' and conceit shaken out by the blows of thy weapons all and he shall again hanker after diverse delights, to which Rudra, etc, are addict. 
1.  
Breaths there the Yogi with soul so 
dead against desire who longeth not for the pretty prattle of women,-pretty-made by smiles,--halting accents and sensuous feastings, the prattle, serving as it were, for the triumphal flag of our victorious army, what by Malaya wind and the moon-light, what by jasmine and the hum of bees and such composed? 
Kama. ---Friend! A simpleton surely is Vivēka, inasmuchas he trieth to effect for the 
Jiva, who is such a victim to physical and mental infirmities, the success of Yoga. But it shall be as futile as crossing by swimming the high seas, as flitting 
1. 
Detachment. 
219 
across the blue vault of heaven, as drinking at the mirage, and as taking a bath on earth. 
Further 
1.  Vivēka, intent on liberating the Jiva, and-who is rolling dissipate in revelry and delirious with draughts of sensedelights-knoweth not (it seems) the worth of the amorous sports of celestial courtesans, their charms resembling honey, dripping from nectar-soaked grapes. 
Just mark here the two horns of the 
dilemma :- 
1.  If, through the power of discrimination, a person, in whom the power of aversion (to worldly pleasures) hath just dawned, doth fret at me, how could, he possibly be said to have subdued Anger (Krōdha) ? If (however) on the other hand he casteth away anger, how could he be said to have shunned ine (Kāma)? Vain therefore is the twaddle of fools who speak of the subdual of (both) Anger and Desire! 
me 
220 
(Then enter Krōdha dressed in a horrid quise.) 
Krodha(Approaching in haste). 
Hail my 
friend! Hail, my blossom-bowed Kāma !-the vanquisher of Vivēka by, movements unhindered! Who is this partisan of Vivēka who prattleth in 'vain about the subdual of Anger and Desire? 
(Walking round horridly and with a 
loud laugh). 
1.  How is it possible here to speak of Vivēka, when I-the Vanguard of several arch-chiefs, dancing on the horrid stage of war-am here, I, whose followers, the Asuras, raise feverish panic in the bosoms of Deva-damsels, whose (Devadamsels') sandal-paste, put on to cool heat, anon drieth up? 
Kama.-Welcome, my good friend Krōdha, the foremost among charioteers and ever ferocious towards my enemies! Thou hast come in right time intent on helping me, when I have been deeply deliberating 
221 
as to how I should fulfil 
I should fulfil my master's Thou hast under thy sway 
mission. 
the great Mahēsvara' and others, who (ever so much may) exercise self-control. Hurrah! Our great king hath conquered! 
Further :- 
1.  When vanity hath vanquished, when 1 (Kāma) have stopped havoc, when Mōha hath ceased enthusiasm, when the forest of sin hath burnt away, yet thou, alone of all, fed by the manifold kinds of fuel, say of a particle of contempt, art capable of disrupting Yoga for the Supreme Brahman! 
Vasanta. Surely this meeting of Kāma with 
thee (Krōdha) doth resemble the conjunction of wind with fire! With materials, all so ready, why should we tarry any further? Success surely followeth in the wake Methinks success will crown us, if we only adopt the plan (of nocturnal slaughter) advocated by our dear friend Kāma. 
of enthusiasm. 
1. 
Siva. 
222 
For :- 
1.  Let fawn-eyed celestial damsels,with their glances dancing like the bees that form Kāma's sugar-cane bow-string-with lovely breasts bending that make them be mistaken for the ruby-creepers' flower bunches, guarded by Kama's demireps,walk round the Jiva, who is absorbed in 
Virakti. 
Kama.Friend! The best of seasons, Vasanta, remindoth us opportunely of what we should do. With Kródha marching in front, heading the celestial-courtesanbattalions, I shall follow, with the string firmly braced to my how; and thou shalt follow at my heels, guarding the flanks, with all wistfulness, vigilant all round. 
(All march as described above) 
Vasanta.—Oh Kāma and Kródha-the foremost in Mahāmóha's army! Hear my advice. This is the occasion to despoil Yoga that is about to be begun, by nocturnal slaughter. 
For you riseth the moon lustrous, 
making the oceans four well. Behold - now in our front the rising moon-beansbarbingers, as it were, of the emerging moon-the lover of the blue-lotus tank and the servant of the moon-faced young damsels, marching in thy front. 
1.  Yon anoon-beams, as they are, 
milky sea's swell, 
From the whale's mouth, drunk 
and emitted, lovely as dame Night's 
amorous smile, 
Shining as white sandal-paste mixed 
with camphor white, 
Feast the eyes onlooking the East, as 
if drenching them in ambrosia cool. 
Besides :- 
.28. 
Behold you Udaya Mountain's 
splendour, doubled by the rising 
Moon's lustre, 
Seeming, as it were, an elephant with conch-decked ears and with flowing 
ichor color! 
224 
Krodha, Ah dear destroyer of demon Sam- 
bhara1! In troth Vasanta but spake the 
fact. 
Now :- 
1.  The damsel moonlight, shining rising Milky Ocean, doth beget in the direction East, the daughter-peerless Loveliness who maketh blue-lotuses blossom. Behold the waxing night when lovely stars do twinkle and when the tress-like Darkness, seemeth, as it were, somewhat dishevelled by the throes of childbirth ! 
Kama. All regard is indeed due to my friend -the Lord of the galaxy of stars, who is armed with weapons, mighty to dispel pitch-darkness and who doth adorn the plaited hair of Siva. 
1. 
2.  This Moon, the shedder of lovely moonlight, the wishing-gem of the anguish 
The allusion is to Kama's incarnation as Aniruddha, Sri Krishna's grandson, when he killed demon Sambhara and married his daughter Usha (vide 10th Skandha of Sri Bhagavata). 
1. The Moon. 
2. Lit: Chintāmani. 
3. 
4. 
225 
of the love-lorn She-Chakravāka,' the instructor of Kāma-Sāstra, the mirthmaker of the triple-world, the vouchsafer of delight on the blue-lotus tank, doth dissipate steadily the darkness that hath held possession of all the directions. 
Further :- 
1.  Yon moon-beams, distilled from its rise from Vishnupāda, making the twinkling stars look like piles of foam, rising from the Udaya mountain and resembling celestial Gangā, doth give variegated colors to the Yamunā-like darkness. Friend Behold the plenitude of my 
Kródha! help! 
1.  You Lover of the stars is my loved friend; moon-light is my mate: Vasanta, who equippeth me with flowery weapons in abundance, is my relative esteem-worthy; in the event of danger, thou, O Kródha of irresistible force! art my protector. Who 
Ruddy-goose. 
(bird) 
Two meanings:-Blue vault and Vishnu's feet. 
S. S. 15 
226 
then with any regard for life shall stand before me, arined with my bow of blooms ? 
Krodha. --Friend! When fortune favors, what 
all to us shall favorable not be ? 
Further :- 
1.  How to call a person desireless, when he doth desire to conquer thee (Kāma)? If he doth not desire to shun thee, he is certainly not devoid of desire, inasmuch as thou desertest him not. 
Kama.-Enough of this procrastination, which 
is but the thief of time. This Jíva who hath entered on Yoga shall now be approached by us. 
(All do accordingly). 
Vasanta. ---Behold this Jíva, who hath just embarked on Yoga, by Vivēka directed, the latter doing all things opportunely for Jiva who is absorbed in meditation on the twin-feet of the Supreme Lord, renouncing all his attachment for sense-dictates. 
227 
1.  The Jíva peruseth the purānas1 which speak about the terrors of hell and yet falleth frequently into sloth: he perceiveth the soul as distinct from the body and at the same. time tendeth the body with all care; he longeth deliverance from the ocean of sorrow and yet sense-lusts. Pining thus, in a double life, he seemeth as if rocking in a swing2 ! 
hankereth 
Kama. — Friend 
after 
Kródha! 
Vasanta hinteth 
that Jiva hath not yet attained the stage of profound meditation. Our help-inate Vishaya-vāsand“, ever (busy) begetting eternal and marvellous effects--a perennial stream-is unassailable even by those who have subdued the enemies-the senses external and internal". 
1. Sacred legendary chronicles, 18 in number. 2. The implication is that Jiva is always in a 
dilemma. 
Sense-association. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Kama, Krodha, etc, (Anger, Lust, etc). 
Sensuousness.་ 
228 
1.  Even granting that Jiva transgresseth the ocean of samsara in secrecy (thus) engendering a longing for salvation and that he indulgeth in pleasing parleys with Yogis, even then, the mind, vestured by garments woven by evil propensities manifold, such as egotism, loseth anon its equilibrium. 
着 
Vasanta. Terror of the enemy host thou art (sure)! Beware also of another matter. Even though one hath dissociated from society, self-esteem alone is enough to violate one's Yoga. It is for this self-same reason that Samvarta, Jada-bharuta, Vidura and others, rightly understanding the moral of Hiranyagarbha's text', courted public contumely, serving as sin-remover and led a life as if of madmen. Therefore before the Jiva might arrive at this state of contumely-courting, let Kródha seize him swift, using contumely itself as the medium. 
: 
1. संमानना परां हानिं योगः कुरुते यतः । 
जनेनावमतो योगी योगासिद्धिं च विन्दति 
229 
1.  But now the Jíva is at hearing', instructing, learning, asking*, adoring, singing, touching, 
praising", the 
the Lord. 
realisings and Thus perpetually 
revelling in the enjoyment of the worship of Murāri's feet, it may be that Jiva, seated firmly in his fortress of wisdom, is well nigh unassailable. 
Further :- 
1.  The Jíva, who, weaned from vain wants, is happy, and even from law-allowed wants free, spurning them even when they spontaneously approach, and injuring none, liveth thus the life of a boa-constrictor". 
Kama.-(Smiling and shy) Friend! How is it 
1. The attributes of God. 2. What he heard to others. 3. The lore allied to the subject (of Yōga). 4. His doubts 5. The Lord. 6. His 
materials of worship ie. 9. God. 
through his Acharya. Holy names. 7. His Basil etc. 8. His form. 
1.  The life of a boa-constrictor lies in the fact that it only receives its food reaching its mouth of its own accord. 
• 
230 
that at war time, thou art as timid as a child. 
For, thou dost not appear like taking time by the forelock. 
1.  Thou, the best of seasons and right worthy to enjoy pleasures infinite, art my friend. Myself am 
Kāma great, holding under my grip mortals and immortals and animals, and this is Kródha, cruel by nature and resenting all opposition to me. We three therefore shall jointly now perpetrate nocturnal slaughter as did Asratthama and others' of old. 
Vasanta. Friend! I am not unmindful of all the pros and cons in this affair but I doubt how we shall be otherwise than unsuccessful when Jiva doth not allow us the slightest loop hole, for, what availeth the waking sentinel after the house has been rifled by a gang of thieves ? 
1.  To promote Nivritti-Dharma and to refrain from Pravritti-Dharma, the Jíva 
} 
1. Kripacharya and Kritavarma. 
231 
resorteth to the Universe-Maker, just like an invalid resorting to a physician. 
Kāma 
Krodha.--(With haste). Vasanta and 
shall presently know my extraordinary skill in carrying out what I will. 
1.  Several are the persons of wondrous valour, ruined by this,-myself, by various expedients, without actually taking hold of (the victims), as in the case of Jamadagni' and others, and actually taking hold of (the victims), as in the case of Rāvana and others. 
Vasanta.--Well known is this, thine exploit ! But where is thy opportunity to seize the 
1. 
A sage named Jamadagni, while penancing in his hermitage, was met by Kartavirys, who, not getting the sacred cow, he asked for, flung a snake in the sage's neck and the sage, enraged at this, cursed Kartavirya, even before the sage was killed by him. The implication is that Jamadagni lost his life through Kartavirya, as he (the sage) became a victim to anger apparently through a snake and not through Anger (Krōdba) seizing him directly. 
232 
Jíva who hath thoroughly renounced the world? 
Krodha. (Shouting Ila! Ha!!). I have opport-. 
unities even for such a person. 
1.  By just robbing a person though he hath detached his mind thoroughly, of a shattered garment of his, a seat, a Kamandalu, etc, by contriving to hide such articles, of a sudden, I shall disconcert the Yoga of a person by bringing about uneasiness of mind, false prattles, untrueimputations, mischief, ignorance, etc. 
Further:- 
What wonder is there in unhinging Jiva's concentration of mind, when I could disturb the minds of highly eminent personages such as Mahēsvara ? 
1.  For an Airāvata, which weareth the flowery-bunch-like Earth as its crest-jewel* 
2. Pot used by an ascetic for keeping water. 2. The Airavata is supposed to bear the Eastern quarter of the Earth on its head and the Earth supported on its head is compared to the wearing of flower bunches. 
233 
with no effort, can the carrying of 
the Lord of the Dēvas (Indra), the overthrowing of the Asura hosts, the shattering of the Kulāchala mountain, and the devastation of forests vast, be a cause of wonder? 
Kama. Friend Vasanta! Beware that what Krodha sayeth may not prove untrue. 
1.  Who dare resist the force of the darkness of Kródha, more powerful than sleep, swoon and death-agony, effacing all established distinctions of castes and ideas of high and low and resembling the dark billows of Yamuna, overflowing its banks, swelled by downpours of coveys of clouds (gathering) at the time of the great cataclysm? 
Further: 
My glory, proclaimed by sages great, such as Vālmíki, is a thing also not to be lightly passed over. 
1.  
Was not even Sri Rāma the victim of 
234 
my contempt through the influence of my weapon, Sri-Rama-the Lion of the Elephant-like Viradha', the exsiccator of the ocean, through the fire of his shaft, the conqueror of Khara, Dhūshana, and their hosts, the severer of the ten heads of Rāvana and the decimator of Kumbhakarna? 
"Vasanta. — Kāma! Well done. 
Kama. --Friend! All praise is thine; for it is through thine influence, all this was done by ine. 
1. 
2. 
Indulging in lamentations etc. over the loss of 
his wife Sita. 
A giant slain by Rāma in the Daudaka forest, immediately after Sita was taken away by 
Ravana. 
1. The allusion is to Rāma drying up the ocean by sending forth his arrows, enraged at the presiding deity of Ocean not answering his call promptly. 
2. 
At Dandaka forest these two giants with their followers of 14000 Rakshasas were slain by 
Rāma all alone. 
235 
Vasanta. -Hallo, Fish-bannered Kāma! Even the greatest warriors plunge into grief through thy greatness and become lunatics. 
1.  A person, 
For:- 
whose eyes' are reddened and who is intoxicated with the wine-like wenches, doth bewail, faint, waver, bemoan and discriminateth nor good from evil. 
(Musing). Unconquerable as ye, Kāma and Kródha are, something still lurketh in my mind. In all, business the greater the succour, the more successful are the results. 
(Gesturing as if approaching footsteps were heard). 
1.  Yonder cometh Lōbha, attended 
by his consort Trishna2, despatched 
by Mahāmōha, to despoil Jiva's craving for Móksha,-Lōbha, the foremost of the devastators of Dharma, the ruiner of 
1. Eyes blinded with passion. 
2. 
Covetousness. 
236 
the efforts of Sama and 
and 
Dama, the 
swallower of the ocean of knowledge 
and the deviser of obstacles to Yógis. 
Kama and Krodha.-(See with delight). 
Vasanta.-Invite here Lōbha, the one coveted 
after, by all minds in the universe. 
Kama and Krodha. Well conceived, 
friend 
Vasanta ! 
Kama.--(Snapping the thumb and fore-jinger 
together). 
Krodha.--(Seconds with loud applause). 
(Then enter Lōbha and Trishnā). 
Lobha.-47. Here in haste approach I-the consort of Trishnā, bearing Mahāmōha's commands on my head, that are as it were, a garland (to the head). Who shall bring about contentment to this self of mine, even with the gift of golden Brahmānda worlds, so famous for immensity and for numbers? 
Love mine I 
(Embracing Trishna). 
237 
1.  The Maker Himself seemeth, dear Trishna! to have created thee-of unfailing youth,' rolling together the beauties of all the maidens of the Devas! 
I shall just demonstrate this :- 
3 
1.  Even were thy belly filled with several mountains of gold and silver,; Trishnā! its emaciation increaseth' all 
the more! 
Trishna. Small wonder that the beauty of this, thine wife, surpasseth that of every other woman! Yet make for me more necklets, armlets, waistlets and anklets, fitting my beauty, gathering together all gems from the mansions of the Dévas and the Asuras. 
Lobḥa.—Love mine! Easy done this, thy request. Vanquished by ine are the Devas and the Asuras, the Kinnaras and the Kimpuru- 
1. cf तृष्णैका तरुणायते (Smriti). 
2. Meru. 
གིས་ག 
Kailasa. 
1. 
And not the belly.238 
shas, the Vidyadharas and the Munis', and men and beasts, in that they mutually kill each other and take even a particle of chaff for the golden Méru. Just hear the pitiable plight I subject him who styleth himself as Kubéra, the Lord of Riches and the companion of Tryambakaa. 
1.  Spendeth not the King of Kings 
his begotten wealth, 
With his wits all bewildered, nor doth 
he enjoy, 
Yet longeth he for more and more 
wealth, knowing not the joy 
of sleep 
Yet guardeth he like the devil, the 
greatest of treasures. 
Trishna.-Aryaputra ! Now that by thee are the worlds three made greedy 
of wealth which is the second Aim of life, what may be the situation of the person possessed of Vivēka ? 
1. Sages. 
2. Sira. 
3. Kubéra 
239 
Lobha.--Love mine? What hath yet to be ascertained is this. Here, awaiting my arrival, remain Kāma and Kródha-instigated by Mabāmóla-to damp the enthusiasm of the Jíva for yōga, We shall just approach them. 
(Approaching). Here is Lóbha, prostrating his elder brothers, Kāma and Kródha 
Trishna. Here is she prostrating-thy daughter 
in-law, ye elders ! 
Kama and Krodha.-Long may ye both live! Vasanta.--Ha! 
Your meeting is like the conjunction of heat, wind and wild fire! Successful shall prove king Mahāmóha's enterprise and your wives, Rati, Jighāmsā' and Trishna shall never to widowhood be victims by (any efforts of) Vivēka. 
(All embrace each other). 
Kamą. -Welcome to Lóbha, the protector of 
wealth-all my world (art thou). 
1. Desire to manslaughter. 
· 
240 
Lobha - Yes, I am indeed the object of thy 
grace. 
Krodha.-Dost thou conduct carefully 
our 
master's business,-thon who turnest away at the mere mention of Moksha ? 
Lobha.---Through thy grace, unfettered are my ways everywhere. Behold now the present unique condition of the world, ardently intent, like Duryodhana, on begetting weath, which is the second End of life.' 
1.  These kings of the earth, ever so firmly greedy for even a particle of a sod of this mean earthy earth, distract themselves; the lords of the immortals do ever tremble with fear, lest their position be coveted by anyone somewhere performing penance; even the ascetics who have renounced the world are not free from the weakness of censuring a person extolled by another. The whole universe is therefore under the influence of Durmati's maids Asúya' and Irshā.2 
2. Envy. 
3. Malice, 
241 
1.  Persons, seized by the demon of insatiable greed, trot though all the Quarters Ten; make the surface of the earth disturbed; sing the praises of the rich; volunteer menial service, to others; cross the high seas with ships and wage vain 
Wars. 
Vasanta.--Ah ! long live thee, Mahāmóha's prime 
minister What obstacles shall there be for thee-the promoter of the Second End of life, so liked by all minds alike, owing to its susceptibility (as means) for enjoyment, the End, proclaimed in Arthasāstra,' that is so patronised by multitudes of kings, the end that is the Incarnation of wealth itself, so well co-operated by Trishna ? 
1.  The End of life named Wealth (Artha) patronised by the votaries of Kāmasāstra2 and begotten by means fair or foul, as may the tides of time determine, is entirely of thy making, what of 
what of earning, of hoarding and of refusing to the needy! 
Science of Wealth, 
1. 
(Second End of Life) 
2: 
"} 
21 
Love, 
(Third End of Life) 
1. 8. 16 
242 
Ye shall heed this my proposal. How 
shall we capture a person clothed in the 
unassailable 
Viveka ? 
armour of wisdom viz., 
Kama. Friend! It is thus that I have made up my mind: shall advance in front; ye three shall, placing Trishna in the centre, follow me and protect both the flanks and the rear. With such unassailable squadron as we are, the baffling of Viveka's efforts, bent upon ruining his own clan, shall be a fait accompli. 
“(All range themselves accordingly and 
walk five or six paces). 
Kama. – (Waving his flowery bow fixed with shafts in haste). Behold ye, the target secured for the darts of my bow,-darts. nice and sharp, now braced to the string. 
1.  Look here how yon person, espousing the way of surrender, realiseth his own self, by singular Yoga-practices, is steady by his senses multitudinous being restrained, breath controlled and weaned (from the worlds), 
243 
treading the way of Nivritti (renunciation). 
Vasanta:-(Looking carefully). 
attention we must now be. 
Heigho! all 
1.  Here museth Vivēka over some secret, helped by Sumati, and all secluded, after retrieving the Jiva from the Ocean of Māya', so as to make him reach Paramapada2. 
Krodha~ (Knitting his eyebrows). Ah Vasanta ! Let the wicked Vivēka deliberate what he may, but the Jiva shall never defeat our designs, led (as we are) by Kānia in the 
1. 
2. 
3. 
van. 
1.  The self-born Kāma, who eateth up the wealth of faultless Yoga, catcheth witless beings", sporting themselves in the Samsāra-sea, boisterous with mighty billows, by his hook of sense-enjoyment, making them thus his condiment. 
See n. 6, p. 72. 
See n. 4, 
p. 72. 
Fish to wit. (i.e., souls in Samsūra are, like fish, 
caught by lust). 
244 
Behold the quaint meditative mood of the Jiva! 
1.  The Yogi, construing knowledge of the True Self as the mansion, blessed attribute-groups-his ornaments, meditation-his sexual enjoyment, secluded habit of austerity-his love-prattle, resorteth to his seraglio of Upanishads, shutting 
himself off from all the world. Thus 
doth he enjoy the moods of Love under the pretext of Peace. 
Vasanta.--(Aside). 
of these vain 
Enough of 
hopes. These are mere castles in the air. 
(Aloud). Friend! In the presence of a mighty foe, of what avail are these bragging words? 
Lobha.--Friend Vasanta! My wife Trishnā hath to be consoled as she is afraid of the 
enemies' tumult. 
(Looking at Trishnā). Charmed looking Trishna! Fear not the foe, howsoever mighty, so long as thou art in the midst of 
245 
this great warrior-squadron. 
Trishna. So long as thou, esteemed by all the Dēvas and the Asuras, art alive, I am ever free from fear. 
Kama.-(Looking round with fear). Now we 
must retrace our steps. 
1.  For, Vivéka, with his natural strength of unfailing knowledge, with wondrous walk, well equipped with the firm armour of forbearance and contentment, appeareth before us, seated in the chariot of Pranana sent by Brahman, and he disperseth our squadron. 
(All fear). 
1.  If one of ye three, 
peradventure, 
meet with danger, surely Mahāmōha whose very life is in the lives of those devoted to him, shall himself put an end to his life. Instantaneously shall his wife Durmati commit Sat. Therefore retreat from 
1. Army. 
2. See n. 6, p. 2. 
3. The Hindu custom of the wife being oremated 
with her departed husband. 
246 
the presence of Viveka is at this juncture most advisable. 
Lobba.--Fight we must not here, without our 
king. He himself will decide what yet remaineth to be done. 
Krodha.--( With disgust). But so far what have 
we done for our king's business ? 
Lobha. --Friend ! 
1. 
2.  The march of time, with the high speed of the sun's car revolving fast, can not be impeded by the impact of a gust of wind from the opposite direction. The wise won't shut the door after the horse 
is stolen. Therefore it is better for us now to think how best we may tide over our future troubles. 
Therefore, in this affair, we must first protect our lives. For, it is said that one must protect oneself by every means in his power. 
Kama.-Our Lōbha, who knoweth the ways of 
the world, giveth us advice most apt. 
247 
1.  It is not meet that we, who wanted to adopt the policy of night-slaughter till now, should fall into the great abysmal pit of angry Viveka. Now shall Mahamōha himself strive to defeat our foe in 
action, himself leading Dambha' with his wife Kuhana and Garval with his wife Asūyā etc. 
Therefore we shall now disperse in different directions, for, they say that to save oneself he should forego the world. 
(Thus saying exeunt all). 
Finis Act IV termed KāmādiVyūha-Bhēda (Dispersion of the Squadron of Kāma etc.) 
AUM. 
ア 
1. Vanity. 2. Fraud. 
2. 
Pride. 
1. Envy.ōM-(A-U-M) 
SANKALPA-SūRYODAYA 
1 