+++
title = "35"

+++


35. On account of the inferential sign further on, together with Caitraratha.

The kshattriya-hood of Jānaśruti is further to be accepted on account of the Kshattriya Abhipratārin Caitraratha, who is mentioned further on in this very same Saṁvargavidyā which Raikva imparts to Jānaśruti.--But why?--As follows. The section beginning 'Once a Brahmacārin

begged of Saunaka Kāpeya and Abhipratārin Kākshaseni while being waited on at their meal,' and ending 'thus do we, O Brahmacārin, meditate on that being,' shows Kāpeya, Abhipratārin, and the Brahmacārin to be connected with the Saṁvarga-vidyā. Now Abhipratārin is a Kshattriya, the other two are Brāhmaṇas. This shows that there are connected with the vidyā, Brāhmaṇas, and from among non-Brāhmaṇas, a Kshattriya only, but not a Śūdra. It therefore appears appropriate to infer that the person, other than the Brāhmaṇa Raikva, who is likewise connected with this vidyā, viz. Jānasruti, is likewise a Kshattriya, not a Śūdra.--But how do we know that Abhipratārin is a Caitraratha and a Kshattriya? Neither of these circumstances is stated in the legend in the Saṁvarga-vidyā! To this question the Sūtra replies, 'on account of the inferential mark.' From the inferential mark that Śaunaka Kāpeya and Abhipratārin Kākshaseni are said to have been sitting together at a meal we understand that there is some connexion between Abhipratārin and the Kāpeyas. Now another scriptural passage runs as follows: 'The Kāpeyas made Caitraratha perform that sacrifice' (Tāṇḍ Brā. XX, 12, 5), and this shows that one connected with the Kāpeyas was a Caitraratha; and a further text shows that a Caitraratha is a Kshattriya. 'from him there was descended a Caitraratha who was a prince.' All this favours the inference that Abhipratārin was a Caitraratha and a Kshattriya.

So far the Sūtras have shown that there is no inferential mark to prove what is contradicted by reasoning, viz. the qualification of the Śūdras. The next Sūtra declares that the non-qualification of the Śūdra proved by reasoning is confirmed by Scripture and Smr̥ti.

