+++
title = "2"

+++




If there arises a doubt as to which particular ground of happiness among t the many different grounds that may occur according to past, present and future, then consider this. A young boy, who wants to understand the meaning of speech, immediately upon hearing the same statement receives knowledge that a birth ceremony is being held. He thinks to himself, "There must be a reason for this." Then he considers, "Is the agreeable meaning which has been understood from the statement the cause of this knowledge that a birth ceremony is to be held ?" and he realizes that this meaning was precisely this that a son had been born. 13 And on that issue: Definite knowledge of the donation of words in a sentence is had through the words that are included or excluded. This being so,

51 words denote their meanings, whether these are established things or not.

62\. OBJECTION. However, the relation of cause and effect is not just known from the fact that one comes into existence upon the existence of the other, for that would mean over-extension. Nor does the realization that a birth ceremony is to be held follow invariably upon the knowledge of an agreeable meaning; for we find also that the same realization follows upon a feeling of distress, namely when the informed father is vexed by the trouble of maintaining his family, "32 REPUTATION. Don't we find that the realization of a karya is caused by a verbal statement, so that we can agree that, for example, the realization that a cow is to be fetched following a statement "Fetch the cow" is indeed caused by that statement? When you say that, since this realization cannot occur without a cause therefore the proximate statement must in that case be the cause of the realization, then I maintain that the same holds also in the case of "A son is born." It has been decided by our opponent that the verbal denotation of a meaning which causes an action to be taken is a result of the inclusion in the statement of a linadi suffix. He who maintains that all words only bear meaningfully on karya, maintains in effect that padarthas!" exist only in karya statements and that e.g. in the case of cows, horses and the like, which are related to bodies, their being a padartha is ascertained by the inclusion or exclusion of the words denoting them in a statement concerning karya. If he says, indeed, whenever their being a padartha is significantly 52 AOAMA FRAMANYAM construed, it is construed just as connected with karya, we reply, Stop being obstinate; for verbal exchange is also possible through denotation of words that are connected with other things than karyas.

· 63\. It is necessary to accept the position that words are denotative of connected meanings, for otherwise it would be impossible to explain that they are denotative of meanings connected with karyas. The definition 'the thing meant by a word is always connected with a karya' fails to cover the defined topic completely; for it does not apply in the case of injunctive suffixes, since these suffixes denote their own meanings as connected, not with karya, but with consequences of already established facts, such as proper qualification on the part of the person en joined etc. Or if it is said that in their case there is denotation of connected meanings and in the other case denotation of meanings connected with karya, we reply that this is a neither old nor young, argument ;156 it is more appropriate simply to accept the view that there is denotation of connected meanings in general.

64\. Therefore, the adherents of all schools should accept that words have proper denotation for the meanings they denote because these meanings are connected with other meanings that are required to complete the sense of the statement, are closely collocated and are appropriate. Even if the denoting power of language were to be understood only through its proper signification in karya statements alone, """ even so it is correct when we decide the denotation of language to take the standpoint that kārpa is just one of the inessential factors of denotation, like the identity

53 of the speaker, the extent of space in which a statement can be heard etc. The logicians hold the view that the meaning of a language statement cannot be known except by language statement. Consequently, there exists no inherent relationship with karya as cause of denotation in uses of words that have their proper signification, just as is the case with floating precious stones on water. Just as this floating, however helpful be to determine the identity of certain diamonds, e.g. the brahmin diamond, serves no purpose when a stone is being transacted which has already been properly identified, similarly the karya,however helpful to understand the proper signification of a word, serves no purpose once its proper signification has been identified.

it may 65\. Moreover, if words denote their meanings only as connected with karya, then how can we know from them that, for example, there is a relation between a fruit and a river-bank, is in a statement : "There is a fruit on the river-bank?" If you say that a statement of such a substantive relation does not denote the relation it states through its primary sense, but through secondary sense, then, we may ask, where do statements then have their primary sense? If you answer in a karya which is not previously known through other means of knowledge, we reply: no, for then no use of words would be possible, since their meaning would not yet have been identified. Naturally there can be no knowledge of the meaning of a word when that word dea meaning not previously known through other means of knowledge, and no cognition can arise from words with unknown meanings, for that would entail over-extension.

54

66\. OBJECTION. My position is this. In ordinary language a statement is understood to have its proper signification when it bears on a karya that is to be accomplished with a certain action. In Vedic language a statement enjoys a special power of denotation which transcends the transitory root-sense of the word "sacrificing ", and it has this power of denotation because it is the means of realizing a certain fruit and acquires this power on account of the collocation of words describing this fruit; whereas in ordinary language, since there verbal exchange is possible also to the unsophisticated, this determination of the nature of word and meaning is not attended to.

140 REFUTATION. This position is just wishful thinking; for a language statement, even if understood in your way as bearing meaningfully only on a kārya to be accomplished with an action, does not by that token set forth a permanent karya, since that would mean over-extension. If we cannot know the true connection of words even when the usage of our elders, through which the denotations of these words is understood, takes place in accordance with these words, then we can never know their connection! If a language statement has lost its postulated true denoting power because it is impossible, it does not thereby acquire another denoting power. In such cases we surely must assume lakṣaṇa. For when certain words are collocated that have incompatible meanings, these words do not therefore denote something else altogether, for then all word meanings would become unreliable.

67\. Besides, we do not admit that the fact that a word has the power to communicate a karya that is not JOAMA PRIMINYAM 55 previously known through other means of knowledge proves that there actually exists a relationship between itself and the fruit of the action it enjoins. The only relation proved of it is that with injunction, not with instrumentality. That in a statement there subsists a relation with a karya which transcends the root-sense of the verb cannot be proved except by the relation of karya with the fruit of the act, and the latter relation cannot be proved without the former. And therefore there is a vicious interdependence that cannot be refuted. If there is no factor which activates the person who, according to the injunction, is specified by the heaven that is to be achieved, the injunction itself cannot be the means of achieving the desired heaven. The root-sense of the words being transitory, the statement itself cannot function as this means 142 Therefore the assertion that a language statement communicates as its proper meaning a karya which exceeds this transitory root-sense, cannot be correct. A person is not specified hy heaven as the object to be achieved," but it is the person who desires heaven who is enjoined upon to accomplish the act. Heaven can not be the specification of the person's qualification, because heaven is yet to be achieved. Only something that has already been achieved, that actually exists, can specify the person upon whom an act is enjoined, for instance, the real fact of his being alive etc. Consequently only his desire can specify his qualification for the act.

68\. Furthermore, precisely how is heaven, which in your opinion functions as the specification of the person enjoined, an object to be realized, a sadhya? 56

If its being a sadhya means that it is fit for a relation with a sadhana, it is impossible for heaven to be siddha, as long as its relatability obtains, since it cannot become siddha in the meantime. The only authority that exists for heaven becoming siddha in the end is the injunction itself, while the only authority for the injunction is just this that heaven does become siddha. This is plainly a vicious circle. If heaven is the sadlya, the injunction is not the sadhya. It is not possible to combine two sadhyas in one sentence.

69\. OBJECTION. Indeed, the unity of a sentence is broken up when it contains two sadhyas that are independent, but not when the two are interdependent. And here the two sadhyas are interdependent since the realization of heaven is contained in the realization of the injunction. That is what the Author "When says: the niyoga is realized, everything else in accordance with it is also realized;" and: "Why should the realization of the fruit not be held to be subservient to the realization of the injunction ?" Therefore there is no conflict here.

REFUTATION. No; unless heaven is realized, how can the injunction be realized? Without the realization of heaven neither the qualification, nor the object, nor anything else required by the injunction is realized.

70\. OBJECTION. In the case of the qualifications for periodical rites the injunction does not require the 'realization of any fruit."+7 Nor does an injunction to one act fail to apply to a person who really desires another fruit. The pre-eminence is really the injunction's; a person is enjoined upon by the injunc ADAMA PRĀMINYANI 57 57 tion to any act in the same way as he is enjoined upon to perform the periodical acts. For the injunction draws unto itself the desirous person who himself thinks that the heaven which he desires is the principal object, in the same way as the injunction to perform the periodical acts activates a person, even though he does not desire anything, to these acts which bear no fruit at all.

Besides, a person who is desirous of heaven also opens and shuts his eyes; for you these actions do not subserve his realization of heaven. Why not consider the sacrificing an action of the same kind? There are some who do not accept that it is a means of realizing heaven.

71\. REFUTATION. If that is the view, we ask: Are the sacrifice etc., which are to be grasped by the cognition that they are such means, eliminated from the injunction? On this point: When the injunction does not mean to convey a relation between the object to be realized and the means of realizing it, then all acts are fruitless.

Therefore, it is sound to maintain that from the injunctive suffixes there results first the cognition that they are indeed the means to realize the desired object, and that subsequently the desire for this object prompts a person to undertake the act of realization. But it is improper to maintain that the primary denotation occurs in the expressing of a meaning that was previously unknown, and that the denotation in the expressing of any other meaning is secondary. We conclude that ordinary, non-Vedic statements give rise to cognitions concerning meanings that are just so established by these statements, B 58

72\. OBJECTION. But these cognitions do not arise from the denoting power of language, but result from Inference. For these statements, though their denotations in conveying certain meanings are consciously known once their proper meanings have been learnt, do not furnish complete certainty about their meanings merely upon being heard by a listener, when they are accompanied by doubt which is created by the listener's observation that in one case or other statements have deviated from their proper meanings.

And, unless there be complete certainty, the meaning will remain unknown; for no knowledge can arise in one's mind from uncertainty.

If the meaning of a statement is not known, the listener wants to discover it: "The speaker uses words whose meanings apparently admit of being connected; and reliable persons do not use words whose connections are unknown;" and the listener realizes that therefore the speaker has knowledge of such a connection. If the knowledge of connection is thus inferred, the meaning discovered by the listener does not require the authority of verbal testimony. Consequently, since ordinary language statements are dependent on the speaker's cognition; they terminate in that cognition through Inference alone.

73\. REFUTATION. This view is not correct; for a word conveys its right meaning as its natural function, and the observation that in one case the statement happened to be untrue under the influence of defects in the speaker's character should not give rise to a general suspicion which would cause all statement to give up its natural capacity of conveying its meaning.AGAMA FRAMANYAN 59 The suspicion that a fire may not burn in other cases because in one case, when obstructed by mantras, it fails to burn, does not make fire fail to burn! And the fact that the sense of vision may give rise to a cognition which does not correspond to reality-e.g. that nacre is silver-as the result of some optical error does not signify that the visual sense cannot produce true cognition of the visible presence of a pitcher etc.

Therefore, a statement does indeed instantly convey a certain meaning to the listener if he knows the relation between the words and their meanings. It does not require knowledge of the basis. Before there is complete knowledge on the part of the listener about the basic knowledge of the speaker, and, further, when the meaning has been expressed, the question rises: "How does he know this?" and Inference proceeds to resolve that question. You want to infer: "Did the speaker know something?" or wish to infer his knowledge of the connection of the different meanings. But the mere knowledge that the speaker knew something is not enough for utterance and action concerning a statement-meaning to proceed. Inference of a cognition concerning the connection of different meanings is impossible without a prior cognition of such a connection. This being so, the meaning of the statement must be known first. For cognitions whose particular objects are not connected, are not connected themselves. Nor is a particular meaning established by cognitions that are inferred to be such. If yousay that any word combination which is able to convey a certain connection produces knowledge of just this connection, I maintain that the connection of the particular meanings must be 60

known previously; unless a connection has already reached the level of cognition it cannot give rise to being expressed in a statement.

74\. To conclude, the cognition of an established fact in statements like "there is a fruit on the riverbank" is strictly of verbal origin and does not arise from Inference. Therefore the position that statements produce valid knowledge only if they deal with a previously unknown karya is taken only by people whose judgments are'stultified by their continuous preoccupation with their own theories. In the manner set forth above it is true that statements may bear meaningfully and informatively on other meanings as well.

Consequently, all the statements of the Upanisads which set forth the existence of a categorically different Person (e.g. "He is the overlord of the Universe, sovereign of all. He commands all the world"," "All this is manifest to Him150 etc.") are authoritative etc.") are authoritative as to what they state, since they produce indubitable and unreversed knowledge of their contents.

75\. Nor do statements concerning established facts lose their authority simply because of the consideration that repetition or reversion might be anticipated on the strength of our assumption that either a corroborating or an invalidating cognition about the same facts could conceivably occur; for the same thing would also apply to statements concerning tarya. Besides, a karya can also be known through other means of knowledge, e.g. the karya that firewood is to be fetched; for it has been admitted that that karya can also be known through another means of knowledge as

61 Or if a in the case of the cooking of the odana. statement which sets forth a karya about a categorically different act like the agnihotra is held to be authoritative because no other authority for it can be conceived to exist,-why, since there is not a ghost of other authority for the existence of the Bhagavan whose personality consists in unsurpassed knowledge, sovereignty and beatitude, it is all the same, depending on what partisan view one takes ! Moreover, if a cognition concerning a content that is also known through another means of knowledge does not recognize its own content as authoritative, since it has already been taken care of by another authority, this non-authoritativenes of its content is beyond experience for it is a mere matter of assumption. Therefore it must be maintained that all indubitable and unreversed knowledge is authoritative, regardless of whether its content is established, or yet to be performed, or anything else. Hence we reject our opponent's position.

155 76\. The objections that omniscience is acquired by means of the regular senses is incorrect, because śruti contradicts it: "He sees without eyes, hears with ears; he who does not see with the eye, who sees the eyes, has neither effect nor instrument;""154" knowledge, strength and action are natural to Him," etc. These śrutis do not speak metaphorically, for there is no authority for this assumption. Metaphorical usage is assumed when the primary meanings of the śrutis make no sense. Since the primary meaning here makes sense, the assumption of metaphorical use is baseless.

62

77\. OBJECTION. But in this case we have in fact reason to cancel the primay meaning, because the primary sense militates against other means of knowledge.

REFUTATION. What other means of knowledge? Not, to start, Perception, for we see no Perception occur which shows that the said Person is non-existent. If you retort that non-existence is decided by the nonapprehension of what should be there, we reply that this does not hold in our case since the object, that is the said Person, is actually apprehended through Scripture itself, which is the highest-ranking among the assembly of the means of knowledge. Nor does it militate against Inference; for how could an Inference which disproves that Person arise at all, slow-moving as it is, when its object is instantly refuted by the rapidly arising scriptural cognition? Moreover, if this were so, the relation of sacrificing etc. to heaven, apúrvalss etc., would logically be contradicted by the fact that sacrificing etc. are actions, when Scripture did not cancel such reasoning. True, the identity of sacrificial pole and sun, which is asserted by Scripture, is cancelled by another means of knowledge, namely Perception alone, because the difference between a piece of wood and the disc of the sun is indeed obvious. Besides, in this case it is legitimate to assume metaphorical usage, for the statement of this identity is an arthavada, since it forms one single statement with the proximate injunction about the unction of the sacrificial pole, 157 There is no other injunction to which it could be accessory 15 an arthatada. Alternatively, inasmuch as the human importance of a IOANA PRIMINYAṀ 63 statement would be lost if there were no injunction to connect it with, an injunction may be supplemented and then the arthavada is regarded as accessory to that supplemented injunction.

For 78\. The objection" that as long as statements fail to prompt the operator of the means of knowledge to being active or to prevent him from being active, they do not communicate self-sufficient information, does not hold good. For, we find that statements have human importance also outside any connection with an injunction; in such a case it will be as in the statement “A son has been born to you," and the like. Nor need an injunction be supplemented in these cases. without an injunction, too, joy arises from the informa. tion that a son has been born. Likewise, a statement which is self-sufficient in merely expressing particular actions which questioners want to know in exchanges of question and answer-e.g. "Which action?" "Cooking!"-do not require the supplementation of an injunction. In the upaniṣadic texts the knowledge of brahman is declared to be rewarded by great bliss: "the brahman-knower becomes brahman"; 159 the brahman knower attains the supreme"; "the saman cantor attains with brahman all that he desires: ""161 the human importance of statements without injunctions is quite clear from these and other scriptural words.

1 To sum up, when it is established that the Bhagavan is the treasury solely of beautiful qualities of direct universal cognition, compassionateness etc., qualities which are true and natural to Him, and which we know from hundreds of quoted śrutis, then it 64

is also established that the Tantra which is based on His universal cognition is authoritative indeed.

79\. OBJECTION. Granted that, as you have described it, there exists some Person who is endowed with natural omniscience, as it is known from the upaniṣads, yet, unless it is absolutely certain that this Person is indeed Hari, Pañcaratra will not be authoritative.

REFUTATION. This is a worthless remark; no experts in the Veda dispute that the Supreme Soul, cause of the entire universe, is Vasudeva. For He is revealed in the upaniṣads as the Supreme Soul: "Truth, knowledge, infinite; that is the supreme step of Visņu. Vasudeva is the ultimate matter, the ulti mate spirit" 162 He was alone beyond who became this world "; " higher than whom there is nothing at all" in accordance with the subject expressed in these statements there are passages like: "From whom these beings..." "Sat alone, my son..

"Therefore Visnu's perfect knowledge is established by the upaniṣads. And it is not declared in śruti that the origination, subsistence and destruction of the world are caused by anyone but Him. Hence there is a consensus that He is the supreme omniscient soul.

That He is the Supreme Soul we learn also from the statements of Dvaipayana, Parāśara, Narada and other great seers. Thus "Know theu, O tormentor of thy foes, that the entire world rests on Visnu. The Great Viṣṇu creates the totality of creatures, moving and unmoving. In him they go to their reabsorption, from Him they originate," "The glorious Sage Nārāyaṇa, without beginning or end, is the sovereign

65 Lord. He creates the creatures, those that stand still and those that move. That He is the Supreme Brahman is also learnt elsewhere. Kesava, O best of the Bharatas, the Blessed One, is the sovereign, the supreme soul, the entire universe: thus it stands revealed in many places of the Scripture." 16 For those who seek to know the supreme principle by means of many-sided reasonings Hari alone is the Principle, the great Yogin, Nārāyaṇa the Lord. ""16" Likewise in the Danadharma, "Padmanabha is the Supreme Soul, the highest One, the pure One, the Refuge. This is the secret doctrine of the Veda; dost thou not know, sacker of cities? By His grace do we all cause the worlds to exist. And the trusted ones, and the first among the immortals, and the gods are held to be His representatives, If Visnu is indifferent, no good will come to us." Thus Rudra's word.165 Similarly, in the Mahabharata and Matsya Purana, "He who amongst them is the Supreme Soul, He indeed is the eternal, unqualified, perfect One; He is to be known as Nārāyaṇa, for He is the world-soul, the Spirit." Likewise in the Varaha Purana, "Who, excepting the Lord Narayana, is superior to the God whose conduct has become the life-order on the earth ?\*\* "There has been no God greater than Nārāyaṇa, nor shall there be; this is the secret doctrine of the Vedas and the Purāņas, O excellent ones." 9 66

Likewise in the Linga Purana, "Janardana is the sole Spirit, the highest One, the Supreme Soul, from whom Brahma was born; from Him Rudra and from Him all the world." Likewise Paragara's word,' The world has originated from Visņu 'and' on Him it rests.

He is the maker of its subsistence and its destruction."166 Likewise in the Manavadharmaśāstra,167 "Nārāyaṇa is higher than the unmanifest; the World-Egg originates from the unmanifest.

Within the Egg are all these worlds as well as the earth with her seven continents." Therefore, the study of these and similar śrutis, smrtis, epical texts and purāņas proves that Vasudeva is the universal cause, the Supreme Soul.

80\. Nor do the śrutis declare that Rudra is the Supreme Soul, or that any other deity is. On the contrary, the followers of the Ekayana sākhā'6" say that he has an origin, and the same is found in the Veda itself: "Darkness was here.... from which Rudra is born; that is the greatest in all the worlds, that indeed is the oldest in the worlds." "Similarly, Rudra's position is clearly known to bea result of his karman: "He obtained his greatness by propitiating Visnu." "From the forehead sprang a drop; from that Rudra was born, '2169 These and other śrutis declare that Rudra was born. This being so, the statements that in appearance convey the greatness of Rudra and others really serve as laudatory statements, like the śruti: "the car is • brahman."

67 Consequently, the passages in the Puranas which declare Rudra etc. to be the Supreme Soul have not their primary meaning, because they are in conflict with Perception and Scripture.

81\. Concerning the objection that the assertions of the doctrines of the Tantras are to be rejected since their greatness is set forth only in non-Vedic Tantric texts, we say that Visnu is stated to be the Supreme One in the texts of the Way of the Vedic doctrine. example in the Vişņu Purāṇa, For "The Supreme Soul, the Basis of all creatures, the Supreme Lord is called by the name of Visnu in Vedas and Upanisads."""" In the Varaha Purana, "The Supreme Brahman is Visnu; the triple division in the pathways of the Vedic doctrine is here set forth; the ignorant do not know this." There has been no god greater than Nārāyaṇa, nor shall there be; this is the secret doctrine of Vedas and Puranas, O excellent ones." Likewise in the Matsya Puraṇa, "In those acons where sattva prevails, the greatness of Visnu is declared. In aeons predominated by tamas the greatness of Fire and Siva is expounded.""" Likewise in the Linga Purana, "For there is no other recourse ordained but Vişnu; this the Vedas constantly declare, no doubt about it." Likewise in the Vayu Purana, 68

"The Spirit that belongs to the Way of the Veda is explaind to be the thousand-armed supreme lord of creatures." Likewise in the Bhavisyat Puraṇa, 44 Visnu is traditionally known to be the Sepreme in the pathways of the Vedic doctrine. Visnu is the greatest among persons, the most exalted Supreme Person.""" All this has already been explained in great detail in the Purusanirnayals and is therefore not further enlarged upon here. Therefore, how can our tongue endeavour to say that the Tantra which is revealed by Visanu who is known from the Upanisads is false? For He is such that He has an immediate insight into the dharma of Consecration, Propitiation etc., by virtue of the omniscience that is natural to Him."""


## ...



"+

Also in the Santiparavan: "Certainly, the Vaisnava must undergo Consecration with all effort: for Hari will be particularly graceful to one who has been consecrated and to no one else. One should consecrate a Brahmin in spring, a Ksatriya in summer, a Vaisya in the autumn, a Sudra in winter, a woman in the rainy season according to the Pañcarātra doctrine."206 And likewise: "It has been made commensurate with the four Vedas on the great Mountain Meru."20 Now, how could Dvaipayana reject the Pañcaratra, which is his own supreme doctrine, comprising the sense of the Upanisads, as follows from these and a hundred direct and circumlocutory declarations made with full respect? 80

95\. ODJECTION. But then how to explain the sutra ulballyasaṇibhavā!?203 REPLY. What is the intention of the sūtra? OBJECTION. The following: Since it is expounded in the Bhagavata Sastra that the individual soul has an origin, and since this is impossible as it militates against Scripture and Logic, therefore this gastra is erroneous.

REPLY. If that is the meaning of the sutra, then how can the sutra be intended to reject the Pancarātra Sastra? For the Pañcaratra Sastras do not accept that the individual soul has an origin, which assumption would have justified the sutra's rejection.

OBJECTION. But is it not their assertion that Vasudeva is at once the supreme material cause and the supreme spirit; that from him the individual soul Sankarṣana is born, from Samkarṣaṇa the mind called Pradyumna, and from the latter the ego called Aniruddha ? REPLY. NO. The personal manifestation of God is described as being constituted by vyuhar,209 and the word individual soul" is assigned to one of these oyihas for practical purposes, in order to prove clearly the differences that exist within the Adorable One, which differences are in accordance with those of the varnas. It is as they say: "The four vyhas are to be worshipped successively by the four varnas successively." Besides, the words 'individual soul,' 'mind' and 'ego' do not denote these tanmatraso themselves, but refer to a person who is the superintending deity of these orders and whose personality is entirely different AGAMA PRAMANYAN 81\.

from the order he superintends. Birth is described as the acquisition of various bodies, as is said in the statement toyena jioan in the Yajurmurdhan." Besides, the Author of the Sutras has already discarded the śruti, smṛti and profane views concerning the origination and reabsorption of the individual soul in the sutra caracara paparayas tu syat tadayapadefo bhāktas tadbhacabḥācitrāt.212 And since, moreover, the origination of the individual soul out of Brahman has been rejected in the sūtras nātmā śrutch nityatvāc ca tabhpal, it does not occasion a renewed exposition: an issue which does not need being made a topic would then be made a topic.

96\. This also explains the sūtra na ca kartuḥ karanam; for it is not said here that the instrument, Sc. the mind, originates from the agent, sc. Samkarsana. For we have already stated that these names solely refer to the persons who superintendent these orders but are themselves different from them, OBJECTION. Then why this sutra at all? For we do not find that instruments, like a batchet, originate from an agent, like Devadatta, so that an instrument out of an agent makes no sense.

REFUTATION. Well, then you reject the general view that all instruments, vital airs, mind etc. have their origin in Brahman which itself is without the entire collection of all instruments and rests solely on its own power; this view is stated in the text: "From it springs the vital air, the mind and all the senses.""215 Or if you do agree on this because it is clearly proved in Revelation, 1 ask you why you don't agree.

11 20 82

on it because it is clearly proved in Pañcaratra.

It is not a very proper procedure to deny things that are proved by smrti; since both śruti and smrti spring from perfect knowledge, they are equally valid.

97\. OBJECTION. The sutra vijanadibhāve vā tadapratisedhal216 is explained as follows: The Author raises the question which one of two alternatives may be true: Are these four equally and independently sovereign, or has one a quaternity of personalities which he has assumed at his own desire? and then he points out the defect: if they are equally sovereign, none of them can be effects because they are equal; when they are different forms of one, what is the purpose of this division ? REFUTATION. That is not correct, because an alternative is impossible. For no one who holds that there is a God theorizes that the world has several Gods, least of all the Pañcaratrikas who hold that "Vasudeva is the ultimate material cause". But this one Bhagavan, who has divided Himself into four for reasons of sport, protects the entire world. And this position is not unjustified, because it is justified in the same manner as the appearance of second-born and first-born brothers like Bala and Bharata. For just as the Bhagavan, who has created the variety of phenomena of ether, 'Wind, Siva, Brahma etc. for His sport, whose sole motivation is the sport of his unfathomable power, has voluntarily assumed the personalities of Rama, Laksmana, Bharata, Satrughna etc., without there being the possibility of logical conflict in the same manner the divisions of and

83 Samkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, too, are unconflicting.

either 98\. Furthermore, vipratiṣedhat7 may mean "because of conflict with Revelation", on the basis of the citation "failing to find in the four Vedas..." or "because of mutual conflict between the Tanti as themselves". The former alternative, incompatibility with Revelation has already been refuted as being without valid basis. Mutual conflict between the Pañcarātra Tantras themselves, whose terminological precision has been perfected by the rules of logic governing principal matter, generality, peculiarity, quality and the like, does not exist. On the other hand, statements that lack the corroboration of logic can have no cogency; as the maxim says: "A statement must have precision perfected by logic before it can communicate its meaning." Consequently, the Author of the Sutras gives the lie to those exegetes who, hy superimposing on the Pañcarātra Tantras (whose validity he strongly affirms as no less than that of the Vedas, in such assertions as "idam mahopanisadam," etc.) the non-existent doctrine of the soul's origination, explain that the sūtra means to reject the Pañcaratra Tantras. Enough.

of the book! 99\. The meaning of the sutras is this. First the Author has set forth that the doctrines of Kapila, Kasyapa, Buddha, Jina and Pasupati, who oppose the Author's own accepted doctrine, are unnatural" because they conflict with Revelation and logic. Now, in order to remove the suspicion that the Pancarãtra 84

Tantras (which are his own accepted doctine) are equally unnatural with the other doctrines because their usual enumeration on an equal plane with the others has made them closely associated with them in people's thinking, he elicits their validity.

In the first two sutras the prima-facie case is laid down: the Pancarãtra likewise has no validity, ulpallyasambhavat, i.e., on account of the impossibility of Sarıkarṣaṇa's origination which is taught there. Why should it be impossible? Because it cannot be established in either of two possible cases; either the four has are equally sovereign, or else one God exists in four persons; and in either case there is impossibility of origination. If they are equally sovereign, they cannot be created because they are equal; if only one being is admitted no origination is possible either, since a distribution within one being of creating and created parts is inconceivable.

100\. Similarly na ca kartuḥ karanam: Pañcarātra has no validity for the further reason that it is impossible that the instrument, sc. the mind called Pradyumna, originates from the agent, sc. the individual soul called Samkarsana, for the hatchet does not originate from Devadatta. Or there is this alternative explanation of na ca kartuḥ karanam: and for the further reason that the instrument does not originate from the agent Samkarsana, since according to the text: "From it spring the vital air, the mind and all the senses," it is revealed that all instruments really originate from Brahman.

101\. Then AGAMA FRAMANYAM 85 follows: vijñānādibhāre va tadapratisedhali. By the particle ca this prima-facie case is now reversed. What has been said, viz., that there is no validity since in neither case origination of Sankarṣaṇa etc. is possible, is untrue: it is not contradictory that Samkarṣaṇa etc. have originated. Indeed, it would be contradictory if they were not oijnanadi.

Vijñānādi is a dvandva compound: "knowledge and beginning," that means: Brahman; thus mijnānādibhāve means brahmabhave. Inasmuch as they are Brahman (brahmabhave), the origination is not contradictory. That is to say by virtue of the fact that the unique Supreme Soul Vasudeva, whose omnipotence is unbounded, enters into them through His māyā, a cause-effect relation is justified. The objection that the mind cannot originate from Samkarsana, on the authority of the śruti that the mind originates from Brahman, is invalidated by the fact that he, sc. Samkarsana is vijānadi, i.e., Brahman.

102\. Furthermore, what is being said in the argument na ca kartuḥ karanam? Is it that the instru ment of a certain action does not originate from the agent of that same action; or that no instrument of any action whatever originates from any agent whatsoever? If the first view is taken, we have a conflict with Inference, because the argument contains the fallacy of proving the proved. The mind, originating from the agent Samkarsana cannot be the instrument of Samkarsana's action of originating it, since it itself is the object of the action; nor can it be the instrument of the action of being originated, since it itself is the 86 AGAMA PRAMANYAN agent of that action. we have a conflict with Perception, because we see that for instance a pitcher, though it be the instrument of an action of fetching water, yet originates from the agent of such an action, the potter.

This the Author says in the sutra vibratiṣedhat: 'because there is conflict.' If the alternative view is taken, 103\. As to the other explanation that has been given of these two sutras,2 220 since it is vijanadi, i.c. "a ground for validity", 221 the denial of the validity of Pancarātra is not justified, because it entails overextension. The invalidity, which is defined by the non-origination of knowledge through repetition or dubiety in the Tantras, is rejected, because knowledge is actually had from them. In order to remove the suspicion of untruth occasioned by the speaker's character, the word adi is used to convey the intended meaning that the Tantras are in fact spoken by a trustworthy person.

Consequently the meaning is this: He always has direct knowledge of the entire world by virtue of the omniscience which is part of His nature; He bestows man's wishes upon him, when He is satisfied—and he is satisfied by meditation alone; Him the experts in the Veda describe as eternally satisfied in all His desires: how then can there be defects in Him like error, deceit etc.? 104\. The 'impossibility of origination,' which has been stated in the first two sutras, is thereupon denied for Samkarsana and the other forms of God in the sutra vipratisedhat. This means either; "Because there is conflict with the Bhagavan's perception which is LOAMA PRIMIYYASI 87 inferred through Pañcaratra;" or "Because there is conflict with Sruti which is inferred from the same Tradition."" 105\. Or there is another interpretation: since the sutras intend to illustrate the rules of exegesis, the author first assumes that there is a conflict between Śruti and Pañcaratra, though in fact there is no such conflict, and then reasons this out as follows: suppose that Pañcarātra is in conflict with the veda, is this sastra then, like the statements of Manu etc., valid or invalid? This question is thereupon answered: "It is invalid, because of the impossibility of the origination of valid knowledge concerning a conflicting sense; and this impossibility itself is proved on the ground that there is independence of something that is dependent." Thus the sutra utpallyasambhavat means: "because it is impossible that a valid knowledge originates, since, as long as the dependent Pañcaratra Tradition does not start proving the validity of its own sense by establishing the validity of its basis, the cognition which originates from the independent preterpersonal scripture determines the Tradition's sense as being different, and consequently conflicting with itself. For Pancaratra conveys that scripture is its basis only as long as the sword of direct scripture does not cut its root.

106\. OBJECTION. But why should the Vedas themselves be independent, since their validity, too, depends on the direct cognition of the Bhagavan, because this cognition is their cause? Just as the Pancaratra Traditions are dependent on His cognition, so are the Vedas too dependent on His cognition. 222 83

RITUTATION. To refute this view, the statement is made: na ca kartuḥ karaṇam: "The Vedas are not the product of a maker, i.c. the Bhagavan. Karana here in the sense of "things that are made or produced," by the rule "suffix-aia in the sense of the object of the action."2" This then means that the Vedas are preterhuman.

107\. Vijñānādibhrive vai tadapratised halt. If, on the other hand, it is not true that the Pañcaratra Sastra is invalid, then what? tadapratised hali, i e. non-rejection of the origination of valid knowledge (namely, even when partly conflicting, the conflicting statement may be valid optionally), because it is based upon the direct cognition of the Bhagavan in whom error and deceit are impossible as He is a source of vijñāna (vijñānādibhāve): Vijñāna means "knowledge par excellence in which no mistake is possible. For since all other authors of Dharmasastras are not omniscient, as they are involved in samsara, and since therefore they are also not entirely selfsufficient, various lapses are con ceivable in their knowledge. Whereas in the case of the Bhagavan, whose supremacy is natural and unlimited, His knowledge is the immediate insight in all dharma and adharma, which is natural to Him and true, as is known from hundreds of śrutis; it is this knowledge which in the sutra is described as vijñāna, When such knowledge is the 'beginning,' i.e. the basis, there is non-rejection, sc. the Sastra is valid.

## …



[[91]] 111\. Nor is positive certainty about such of the speaker's qualities as his reliability required for his statement to be defectless, because the statement's defectlessness is proved solely by its being defectless. As the Author of the Varttika declares, "Then the qualities (of the speaker) do not exert any influence (on the validity of his statement) because (its defectlessness) is already known."229 The same Author also shows that, even when there is certainty about its defectlessness, the existence of qualities (like reliability in the speaker) is helpful: "When defectlessness is known, they are helpful by merely existing." 19250 Nor does the validity, when it has been established require something else in order that consequent actions of acceptance, rejection etc. proceed, because action proceeds on the basis of recollection and desire. As they say, "Action proceeds on the basis of recollection and desire." Moreover, in the case of the self-valid Vedas, too, we find this same dependence in that their validity would not be completely established as long as there were no certainty of their defectlessness after the certainty about the non-existence of their author.

112\. OBJECTION. But when the non-existence of their author is proved without effort by the non-apprehension of what ought to be there, the question of the non-validity does not arise for the Veda, for defects are impossible without something or someone in which they could reside. As they say: "In that case (the Veda) the absence of non-validity follows quite naturally from the absence of an author; therefore its validity cannot be questioned."\*\*" 92

REFUTATION. Why, in the case of Pañcarátra too no question can arise about its validity, since the absence of defects is easily proved by the fact that the omniscient and omnipotent God is its speaker; so the argument is the same.

In other words, in both cases of self-validity there is positive certainty that there are no defects; in the case of the Veda because there is positive certainty that no person is involved who could possess these defects; in the case of Pañcarātra because there is positive certainty that its speaker possesses virtues which preclude defects. It is here as in the following two cases of absence of heat: there is no heat in ether because it is certain that there is no locus for heat in ether; nor is there heat in cold water because there is coldness which precludes heat.

113\. Moreover, neither dependence nor independence is by itself a cause of invalidation.29 The independent cognition that some substance is silver while in reality it is nacre is invalidated by the cognition: "This is not silver:" this cognition itself is consi. dered as dependent. The cognition "This is that flame," is found to be invalidated by the inferential cognition that arises from the disappearance of oil"; the latter cognition itself is dependent because it arises from a sense-perception. The simple truth therefore is that which is susceptible to invalidation is invalidated by that which is not so susceptible; in our present case there is no such susceptibility either of Scripture or of Pañcaratra.

114\. Or if you think that it is impossible to give positive certainty that the Tantra is promulgated by AGAMA PRĀMĀṆYAN 93 Vasudeva, as it is in conflict with Scripture, I ask you : Why then does the knowledge arise that Scripture is preterpersonal, while it is invalidated because it conflicts with Pañcaratra? They accept it that the Veda is preterpersonal just because it is Veda; but then one can equally claim that Pañcaratra is promulgated by Vasudeva just because it is Pañcaratra. If the preterpersonal origin of the Veda is proved by the fact that there is no recollection of an author, then why not agree that Pañcaratra is promulgated by Vasudeva just because there is recollection of his authorship? For there exists a strong transmission of the recollection, extending to women and children, that Kesava is the author of the Pancarãtra. So great a faith do people have in His authorship that they erect monuments according to the precepts of Pañcarātra, donating elephants, horses and great wealth in various fees, In the Skanda Purana it is said that "Kapila is the promulgator of Samkhya, Kesava of Pañcaratra." Likewise in the Mahabharata: "Narayana Himself is the promulgator of the entire Pañcaratra. This great Upanisada, consistent with the four Vedas, as well as with the doctrines of Samkhya and Yoga, called Pañcaratra, which was revealed by Nārāyaṇa's tongue, has been taught to the sages by Narada as he had seen it and heard it in the abode of Brahma." From these and thousands of other statements in the Puranas, which are supported by the rules of interpretation, the conclusion follows naturally that Pañcaratra was indeed composed by Vasudeva Himself. On the other hand, some experts dispute that the Veda is eternal,235 91

Therefore, the real ground for the thesis that the validity of the doctrine of the Bhagavan and that of the Veda is above question is this that both are causes of defectless knowledge. Consequently, because both are equally exemplary, they are optionally valid. It is with this view in mind that the wise Author of the Sūtras has explained: vijñanādibhave viī tadapratiṣedhah.

115\. OBJECTION. However, granted that error is made inconceivable by the Bhagavan's omniscience, yet, since He is also omnipotent, He can also have composed the Pancarātra in order to deceive. Now, when people, considering this possibility, are confused in their minds as to which view they should take, that this Sastra has been promulgated to deceive them, or that it has been stated according to the truth with complete attentiveness of mind, what way is there to resolve their dilemma? We should prefer to decide that since it militates against Scripture it results in disaster.

REFUTATION. To this objection the Author replies vipratisedhat, i.e., on account of the contradiction of all śruti, epic, purana and worldly experience. If, without any reason, merely because the Bhagavan is omnipotent, the question is raised if He might bave intended to ruin His devotees, why, then one could also raise the question whether He would not hurl even the virtuous into hell by a whim of His omnipotence and consequently the whole world would fall into inactivity! Besides, we could also raise the question whether He did not wish to deceive people, because He is omnipotent, and thus created in the beginning the Vedas themselves with false meanings, which are also

95 suprasensible, took away from Brahma etc. also the power of recollecting that He was the creator of the Vedas, and from then onward set in motion the transmission of Vedic instruction until the present day: how can we be sure about it? Or the position can be taken that since there is no evidence that, while He is indeed omnipotent, He acted up to the full measure of His omnipotence, since there is no purpose for Him to deceive people because He is satisfied in all His desires, and since He is not in the least affected by defects of partiality and cruelty etc. because He abides with natural affection for all living beings; and since, if He had composed the Pañcaratra in order to deceive, it would be impossible to demonstrate that the wise men who, up to now, learn its instructions and perform the contents of these instructions have forgotten the defects of its author, it must follow that such a suspicion does not arise; and if this view is taken, all this will equally apply to the Vedas as well.

Therefore, what possible purpose could He who is satisfied in all His desires, who is omniscient and a treasury of compassion have in deceiving the poor people who have failed to understand the meaning (of the Veda)? Or how could the supreme sages everywhere praise the Tantra as being equal to the Upanisads, if it had been composed in order to deceive? For thus the saints declare in Vārāha Purana, the Ramayana and the Bharata etc. that this Tantra is an equally esoteric doctrine as the Vedas; and wc declare the same. "Through Veda, Pañcaratra, through devotion and sacrifice, O Brahmin, I can be 96

attained, and not in any other way, even in hundreds of lacs of years. If one among thousands will grasp the Pancaratra and, at the expiry of his karman, will die my devotee, the Vedas and the Pañcarātra will dwell in his heart forever.237 This supreme Pañcarātra doctrine of mine, which is not difficult to grasp, that you shall reach to all the world by my grace, doubtless.25 The Yogins mediate upon the Eternal One with Puranas, Vedas and Pañcaratras, and worship Him with the proper rites. Thus Samkhya and Yoga on the one hand, and Veda and Aranyaka on the other hand are one and the same; all together they are the members that constitute Pañcaratra, O excellent one. He who sees through Veda and Pañcaratra sees truly; this great Upanisada, consistent with the four Vedas...." Since the number of these and similar statements is infinite, we stop here. If you still raise the question if there cannot be ruin in such a Tantra, then there can be no faith in anything. It is with this view in mind that the Author sets forth: vipratisedhat.

Therefore, even if there were a conflict between the Bhagavan's doctrine and the Veda, there still would be option between them; but we have already expounded that there is no conflict between them at all.

## …




124\. OBJECTION. But how can Perception convey that they are brahmins? For when we are close to two individuals whom we have not seen before, one a brahmin, the other a ksatriya, of the same age and the same appearance, we do not immediately observe the distinction that one is a brahmin and the other a ksatriya in the same way as we instantly observe the differentness of a goat, an elephant, a buffalo etc. Nor is it proper to maintain that the visual sense conveys the brahminhood of a nearby individual in dependence on our recollection of his father's brahminhood etc.; for that recollection itself is impossible without a previ ous immediate cognition, just as the recollection of the son of a sterile mother is impossible. Nor can we know from Inference that a man is a brahmin, for we do not find a concomitant mark. And such qualities as tranquillity, self-restraint, austerity, purity etc., cannot be taken as marks of brahminhood, because they are available only in the case of a good brahmin and because they are not exclusively confined to brahmins. Nor can Circumstantial-Implication furnish proof of brahminhood, because it is not lacking in season and the fact that the sentence-meaning of the statement, "In spring the brahmin must add fuel to the fire," is otherwise unestablished does not there 104 JOAMA PRAMANYAN fore by Circumstantial-Implication furnish proof that a man is a brahmin; for knowledge of that sentencemeaning presupposes knowledge of the word-meaning of brahminhood etc.

125\. REFUTATION. All this does not make for a defect in my argument. There is no invariable rule that Perception becomes manifest only at the first contact between sense and object and not otherwise Perception is that which illumines the unmanifest while there is continuity of the operation of the senses. Thus there can be Perception of brahminhood; for when we keep our eyes open we note, immediately upon observing the particular differentiae of the genus brahminhood, that the brahminhood is quite clearly noticeable in those who belong to the families of the different gotras-Vasistha, Kasyapiya Sathamarṣaṇa etc.--, who are pure in their conduct, and who display the sacred thread, upper cloth, hairtuft and munja grass girdle. Nor does it run counter to ordinary experience that the eyes can convey brahminhood in dependence on the observation of the peculiarities of genus. every case the sense becomes the cause of the rise of determination of sense-object when favoured by the accompanying circumstances of place, time, configuration etc. It is the natural function of the sense-organ as such to relate itself to these accompanying circum. stances. As the author says: "No organ of knowledge, whether in Veda or in ordinary process, becomes efficacious in determining the object that is to be realized through the accompanying circumstances unless it is favoured by these circumstances, Consequently the visual sense, when favoured by the recollection In

105 of genus, gives knowledge of brahminhood without the object giving up its perceptuality. So it is evident that the visual sense can be the instrument of knowledge of genus in dependence on a variety of accompanying factors. Gold becomes manifest through its colour fromcopper etc., gheeis differentiated from oil, through its smell and taste; fire, which is hidden by ashes, perceived through touching the ashes.

Sound may provide us with proof that there is a horse in the distance; a pitcher etc. are known through their configuration; brahminhood through descent, and also through conduct in certain particulars, which is completely protected by the king.

the It has been contended that when we see two individuals of the same age and appearance, the difference between the two does not immediately appear to cyc; but the perceptuality of their differentness is not refuted by just this.

In this case the non-perception of their differentness is caused by the defect of similarity. The difference between nacre and silver, which are similar in appearance and configuration, may not be immediately visible, yet that does not mean that their difference is not visible at another time; and the same holds for the difference between brahmin, kṣatriya and vaisya.

Or else, brahminhood is that which arises from the differentiae of genus, and such a product can empirically be known just like any other product by a process of positive and negative consideration, e.g. "what are the specific characteristics to which the elders apply the term brahminhood, or to which characteristics is the term applied?" It has been said 14 106 JOAMA PRIMĀṆYAM often that it applies to those who possess recollection of gotra, Vedic ancestry etc.; let us not start discussing this question again, or we must repeat our old argument: it is established that the Bhagavatas are brahmins, because they possess gotra etc.

126\. The objection 255 Tas made that the Bhāgavatas are born from a vaiśya vratya, on the authority of the two statements: "The fifth one, the Sarvata, must worship the sanctuaries of Visnu by royal decree;" and "he is also called a Bhagavata; he is born from a vaisya vratya." To this we reply: precisely what do we learn from these two statements? Is there a simple connection of names, or must an invariable rule be stated ?254 In It is impossible to make it a rule that the words Bhagavata and Satvata denote a vaiśya vratya, for that is not known from the text, and it involves overextension. In the statement, "the fifth one, Satvata," we do not find a denial that the words Bhagavata and Satvata denote other meanings, for that would mean ignoring the explicit and inventing the unstated. our statement the fifth one, who is born from an vaisya vratya, is understood to bear the name of Satvata: "The fifth one, Sarvata...", since the word 'fifth is the operative term as it is mentioned first. And if the fifth is the Satvata, the Satvata is not necessarily also be the fifth, namely the vaiśya vratya. For when the stated subject (e.g. a mountain) is possessed of fire, the predicated fire does not necessarily possess smoke.255 Consequently the consideration if a smrti statement of this kind cannot give certainty that the words Satvata, Bhagavata etc mean vratya.

AGAMA FRAMANYAṀ 100 107 127\. If it be argued that since these two words also may denote another caste (namely of the vaisya vratyas), then the mere fact that certain brahmins are denoted by these words proves that these brahmins belong to that caste, even though they follow the doctrine of the Bbagavan, it would also follow that, since we find the collocated word acaryas also used to denote the issue of a lowly vaisya, therefore an eminent brahmin who is an acarya imparting teaching of the Veda with its ancillae and its esoteric teachings is thereby denoted as being a vaisya vratya! If, on the other hand, even though a true brahmin is denoted by the word ācārya which dea vratya, there still can be no suspicion that he actually is a vratya, because there is positive certainty of his brabminhood which is clearly proved by other means of knowledge, and because it is possible that the word acarya is used figuratively (ācārya as one who "accumulates"— acinoti the pupil's knowledge) for a Brahmin teacher, then in our case, too, the same argument can be made, namely thus: even though they are denoted by the terms Satvata and Bhagavata, which denote another caste, yet there can rise no suspicion that they actually are vratyas, because the brahminhood of these followers of the Bhagavan's doctrine is firmly known from the recollection of completely obvious clans, Vedic ancestry etc., and because it is possible that the terms Sātvata and Bhāgavata have a figurative denotation of sattva-val57 and bhaga-vat.

In other words, the fact that the same word deboth classes of people does not mean that therefore both belong to one and the same caste, lest the 100 " AGAMA FRAMANYAṀ true brahmin be not made into a low-caste man because he is also denoted by the word tarja.

We find that the word hari also means 'frog.' Does it follow that a lion is a frog because both are denoted by the same word? Then word itself would be horned, since 'word' is denoted by gauli !" Consequently, just as the words sudhanvan, ācārya etc., which denote more than one meaning, are also used for someone born from a vaiśya vratya, so also the words Bhagavata and Satvata.

128\.

109 worship the Bhagavan directly, yet may be denoted by the words satcata and bhagavala, because of their work discipline of cleaning up Vasudeva's temple, clearing away the bali offerings, guarding the idol etc., for it is taught that the can suffix may occur in the sense of a simple relation, "this is of that." And it is declared that the issue of a vaiśya vratya has the work discipline of cleaning the Bhagavan's temple etc., "and (the task) of the satvatas is the cleaning of the deity's temple, the eating of the offerings, the guarding of the idol;" and "he must worship Visnu's sanctuaries."'264 129\. Herewith is also rejected the contention that the Bhāgavatas are vratyas because they would have the same profession. For it is one thing to clean the temple, clear away the bali offerings, guard the idol, and quite another thing to perform the variety of actions that are daily observed by the Bhagavatas: the cleaning of the way to the idol, the preparation for worship, offering, daily study, and meditation. It is as it is in the case of the jyotistoma etc. In the jyotistoma, too, a carpenter has a task in making the various receptacles, soma-cups, soma-decanters, ladles etc., while the officiating priests have their tasks in reciting various different mantra recitations, representing the deity, pressing of the soma etc. And this occupational similarity, limited as it is, does not raise the question whether the priests have the same caste as the carpenters! So here, too, there is a difference between those who perform the pañcakālikā ritual, which is established by the Bhagavan's doctrine, and the low-caste people who do the cleaning-up of the temple and are also called temple-guards.

110

130\. Further, the contention that, if the words bhāgavata and satvata have their etymological meaning, this entails that the word rathakara in the injunction the rathakara must build a fire" desomeone belonging to the three varias on account of its etymology of chariot-making,268 is not correct. For in the case of rathakara it is correct that the term refers to someone belonging to the three varnas, because otherwise the springtime etc., which are given in the statement on the origin of this fire-building, would be invalidated, and because usages of a word in the sense of different castes, which is given in the mantra "saud hanyana ṛbhavaḥ stiracakṣasalp would be invalidated. Despite the fact that rathakara is also a name for another caste-as learnt from the smrti "the rathakara is born out of a kariņi by a mahiṣya" (so that the rathakara is born from an anuloma marriage of a kṣatriya man and a vaidya woman), nevertheless, since, on Sankha's evidence" that the rathakara is not forbidden to perform rites of sacrificing, fire-building and initiation, there is no conflict of qualification for rites that can only be realized through knowledge of the Veda,273 and since the word rathakara (in its etymological meaning) is inappropriate for members of the three varnas because they are forbidden to follow an artisan's profession, therefore we can only conclude that in both cases different castes are denoted by the term, and so there is no conflict.

Moreover, when knowledge of the thing meant by a word is obtained from the denotation of the separate members that compose the word, then the Author of the Sutras rules out the validity of a denotation in

111 which the meanings of the component members are lost, namely in prokṣanisu arthasamyogāt.274 Therefore, those eminent brahmins are called sātvatas and bhagavatas who because of their pure character (sattva) devote themselves to the Bhagavān who is the Supreme Person. Later on we shall show that other smṛtis set forth the eminent brahminhood of the Bhagavatas.

131\. The further objection," namely why these people should invariably be denoted by the exclusive names of Satvata and Bhagavata, if their brahminhood were the same as that of others, can be answered thus: there is no defect in that, for it is as it is in the case of the names parivrajaka and nigadu. Certain brahmins are called bhāgavatas, just as certain brahmins are called pariurájakas, and certain yajul formulae nigadas, though both are equally brahmins and equally ya juḥ formulae; namely in the statements: The brahmins should remain, the parivrajakas must be fetched;"76 "the yajul formulae take place, not the nigadas; the nigadas take place, not the yajuh formulae;"""" and this is so because of the interpretation: "the nigadas are the fourth mantra collection, or the yajul formulac, because they are identical." 132\. The contention that the Bhagavatas arc bad brahmins because they perform pūjā to the God, partake of the offering substance etc. for a livelihood, is countered in the following manner: Surely not all Bhagavatas worship Hari for their profession, for many Satvatas are found who perform puja for themselves. If there are certain people who, while being Satvatas, 112

follow a reprehensible profession and perform sacrifices for respectable Bhāgavatas professionally, this fact alone does not mean that one may say that they are not brahmins. A vedic priest who officiates as an adhvaryu at a jyotistoma does not thereby lose caste. If the priest were not to receive fees, the puja itself would remain fruitless; they take fees in order to realize completely the excellence of the pūjā. At the conclusion of the worship one must give gold to the priest according to capacity; otherwise the fruit will go to the puja priest himself, as is shown by the smrti: "A sacrifice for which a small fee is given kills (the sacrificer)."279 It is however prohibited that a covetous Vedic priest officiate as a priest after he himself has put up his demands for a fee, c.g. in the statement: ("There is an error called 'garbage""). When the sacrificer appoints as a officiant priest who covets the office, thinking either "He should give me (a fee)" or "He should choose me." "This is as far from the sacrificer as garbage; this does not benefit the sacrificer."'280 donation of the sacerdotal fee which is purified by faith is felicitous for both, as according to the smrti, "He who receives the offering and he who deit both go to heaven.\*\*281 The 133\. The statements that professional worship of the deity and living off the god's treasure makes a man a devalaka must be taken to refer to the profes sional worship of, and the living off the treasure of, other deities than Vasudeva. Thus the blessed Vyāsa: "A devalaka is he who lives on Rudra etc."\*\*\*\* And there is also Sandilya's word: "All those who perform sacrifices professionally and are also not consecrated

113 are the only ones who are traditionally known as karmadevalakas in this world, O sage. One should not touch them or consort with them for a year." Likewise: "Certain people who are karmadevalakas and kal padevalakas are unqualified for ritual before the deity for a period of three years. Those brahimins who, without being consecrated, perform rites set forth in the Kalpa, either professionally or for the fame of it, are kalpadevalakas. One must have puja offered by another professional priest who has been properly consecrated; one is unable to worship the god oneself. This is the principal offering; in another manner it is secondary." "In another manner,' that is to say, when it is done by a non-consecrated priest. This the author elucidates: "The rite performed professionally by 'some priest who has not been properly consecrated is called of the lowest degree." By considering these and a hundred similar smrti statements we can be sure that living off the deity's treasure and professional pūjā offering of brahmins who go without the sacrament of consecration as established by Pañcaratra renders them sub-Brahmins and devalakas.

134\. As to the statement that the Bhagavatas cannot pass for exemplary persons because they make. use of flower and food offerings, which practice is abhorred by exemplary persons, to this we say: what does the śrotriyas mean by left-over flowers and leftover food? When he takes it only as the flowers and the cakes,\*\*\* he is contradicted by all the world, for nobody approves of wasting flowers and cakes. Also, a particularized prohibition is not in order, because it is not established. No notion of a particularized 15 114

thing occurs when the particularization is not determined; and here it is impossible to determine the particularization.

OBJECTION. Why should it be impossible, since the particularization is that it is forbidden to use food what has been offered up to the deity? REPLY. Are you now accepting the validity of Pañcaratra? For only when one admits that there is a deity present in the idols that are erected with the sacred formulae en joined by Pañcaratra Tantra can one postulate that the particularization of the prohibition lies in the offering-up to the deity. For unless the validity of the Tantra is admitted, how can an idol which is set forth in the Tantra be a deity, and, a fortiori, how can the substance that is offered up for this deity's sake be nirmalya and nivedya, For a deity does not exist by just being a deity; only that deity which is known to be correlated with an oblation on the authority of scriptural testimony is the deity to that oblation; that is your own doctrine.

100 Or if it be held that something is nirmalya and nivedya because it is admitted by the Pañcaratrikas that it is offered up to the deity, well, in that case you must also admit its purity because the Pañcaratrikas accept also that the utilization of nirmalya and nivedya is perfectly pure.

Or if you do not accept this peculiar excellence, since in your opinion the Pañcaratrikas have accepted as pure something that is really impure,-well, in that case you must accept it that the substance which is offered up is not really nirmalya and nivedya, since then

115 you opine that the Pañcaratrikas have adopted someone who is not really a deity by mistaking him for a deity! In other words, inasmuch as the offering up of mere flowers, cakes etc.209 is not approved, and because it is impossible to particularize the prohibition of utilizing these substances according to the terms of one's own doctrine, therefore the particularization must be determined in the terms of the others', i.e. the Pañcarātrikas', doctrine; and thus the offering up becomes greatly purifying. And inasmuch as therefore the utilization of nirmalya and nivedya becomes most purifying, it must needs be accepted by those who admit the validity of the Pañcaratra Tantra as well by others who do not.

135\. OBJECTION. But how is it possible then that even one who admits the validity of Pancarātra should reject nevertheless the nirmalya and nivedya? For in the Tantras the tasting etc. of the nirmalya is prohibited. For instance, it is said in the Sanatkumāriya Samhita: "The offering that is proffered (to the deity), flower or fruit, is called nirmaly a; that must be avoided meticulously." Similarly in another passage: "When one has eaten nirmalya, or the foodrests of someone who is not one's guru, one must observe a milk-vow for a month, continuously recite the eight-syllable formula, and drink the pañcagavya, in order to be purified." \*\*290 Likewise in the Indraratra: "One should not live off the Supreme God, nor eat the nirmalya offerings." Also: "And the nirmalya offerings are never fit for consumption." Similarly in another Samhita: "One should not eat the nirmalya offerings, 116

nor smell them, nor step over them."-How then can one accept the purity of the utilization of the nirmalya when we thus know from several Samhitas that it is prohibited? REFUTATION. To this he says: The utilization of a proffered substance which has been offered up to the deity is not condemned if it is done within a period of ten nāḍikās.” Thus in the same Indraratra: "The wise one must let the offering-cake stand for ten nāḍikās. This period of time has been prescribed both for night and for day. They condemn the nirmalya that has stood for more than this period of time; thereupon he must throw it in water, or in fire, or bury it in the ground." OBJECTION. But what is said here is not to praise the tasting etc. of the nirmalya, but to prescribe that the substance of the cake pūjā is thrown away after a period of ten nāḍikās. In the statement: "He must let the offering cake stand for over ten nāḍikās,” the injunction is laid down that when the proffered flowers, cake etc. in general have been taken off as nirmalya, because they have now fulfilled their ritual function, they must be kept by way of accessory puja rite for a period of ten nādikas. And consequently even a study of the conclusions of your own Tantras shows that the touching etc. of the turmeric powder, the food offerings and the water used to clean the idol's feet is not established by Tantric doctrine. Now, where are you! REFUTATION. Where are you, loquacious debaters, witless fools who have been swallowed by your own tongue which plays around with a grain of I 117 knowledge! Your objection looks black and white at once, like the moon with its spots. This prohibition applies only to fools like you, since all this is indeed to be observed by Vaisnavas who are qualified to do so, and thus it is capable of wiping off a multitude of sins in the same way as the drinking of soma at a Vedic sacrifice; for it is not to be touched by others, just as the puroḍaśa cake is not to be touched by dogs! Thus in the Isvara Sanhita, "It is difficult to find in this world a true votary of the lord, my son, and, among those who are, it is even more difficult to find a disposition which is truly pure enough for the footwater, or to use the garlands etc. which have been mentioned in the doctrine, Therefore, O six-faced One, all this which is purified by the formulae and the glance of the Bhagavan is forbidden to those who lack this disposition and are not votaries." And in another passage: "The saffron, sandal, camphor and oils that have been taken off Visnu's body are supremely purifying." Likewise in the Padmodbhava: "He who wears the powder that is taken of Visņu's body on his head obtains the fruit of a Horse Sacrifice and glories in Visnu's heaven." Similarly in the Isvara Samhitā, "No blame should be put by statements arising from ignorance on all that is used, the perfume, flowers etc., (the water) of the idol's bath etc., and the curds, milk etc. Those who condemn this divine purifying agent because they consider it nirmalya, those witless detractors of its power will go to hell." The above statements which to the consecrated prohibit the use of nirmalya at the time mentioned in the time instruction must be understood to mean a 118

time subsequent to that when the (offerings to) the chief of the Bhagavan's retinue29 is being used. Since the garlands, sandal etc, which are offered up to the Bhagavan, later on, after the Viśvakşena offering, become unfit to eat, therefore the Satvatas use the nivedya etc. before that time. Consequently the use of the nirmalya is a cause of excellence for the Satvatas.

136\. Moreover, it is our postulation that the exemplary people hold the nirmalya of other gods in contempt; this is postulated like the drinking of soma (which is good) because it is Vedic (in contrast to the drinking of liquor which is evil). So I have said that those who do not accept the validity of the Bhagavan's doctrine are unable to determine what is nirmalya. When it is properly determined (namely according to the Bhagavans doctrine) the Bhagavan's nirmalya proves to be extremely purifying, as is demonstrated by the statements of all Vedic teachers. In a matter for which the only means of knowledge is verbal testimony, it must be so as verbal testimony says that it is. Unless one is deaf, one cannot say that there is no verbal testimony concerning it.

For instance it is said in the Brahma Puriņa: "The nicedia of Visnu is declared by the sages to be pure and fit for consumption; one who eats other nirmalya and nicedja must perform the candrayana in expiation. The malya which is taken from the body of Visņu takes away evil and is holy. He who wears iton his head goes to supreme bliss." It follows that the smrti statement that a man who eats nirmalja and nivedya must perform the candranos should be takenAGAMA PRĀMĀṆYAṀ 119 to bear upon the nirmalya of Rudra, Kali etc. Thusin the Mahabharata: "Meditating in one's heart upon Hari, one must offer food to Him with full attention, thereupon pick up this food again with the middlefinger and the thumb, and then sacrifice it bit by bit, saying: "Prāṇāya svāhā, Apānāyasvāhā, Vyānāya svāhā, Udanaya svālā, Samānāya svāhā." Likewise in another passage, "what has been offered to the god must be given to a brahmacarin." Thus in the Mahabharata: "The saintly knowers of the Pañcaratra ate in his house that which had been left over by the Bhagavan, as a means to attain to bliss, as supreme nourishment."\*\*" And likewise the blessed Saunaka: "He himself eats the nivedya." He who condemns Visnu's nivedya, whose purity is proved by hundreds of similar smrtis and which dispels the fear of rebirth, really ignores the statements of the smṛti because of his heterodoxy and ought to have his tongue cut off 137\. OBJECTION. But how can the nivedya be a means for the prāṇāgnihotra? The exemplary people do not approve of a means for homa etc. for which no building bricks are used. Nor can a substitution of another substance do duty as a homa, because he lives off food that has been obtained according to taste. Nor can a substitution of another consumption be made to replace the nivedya, for scripture enjoins upon the twiceborn a meal in the evening and a meal in the morning, as follows from the prohibition: "One should not take food in between.\*\* REFUTATION. That is no defect, since the multitude of deitics, like prana etc. are revealed to be parts of Visnu, in the same way as Viśvaksena, the chief 120

of Visnu's retinue. For just as the flowers, cake etc., though proffered to the Bhagavan but actually given to Viśvaksena shows that He is familiar under various guises, or just as at a sacrifice the soma juice that is left over by the hotar is pure to the adhvaryu, so it is also with the nirmalya.\*\* Moreover, only scripture can be our criterion for what is to be eaten and what is not to be eaten. When it says that something is fit to be eaten, what injunction are we to invent ourselves? Just as the same rule governs both the periodical and the desiderative agnihotra, so the same rule governing the eating of the nivedya applies also to the praṇāgnihotra.



## ...


139\. May Nathamunis be victorious, he to whom the Three Principles are immediately evident by virtue of his own miraculous power, he by whose pupils the arrogance of the rivals of the Satvata Doctrine is terminated after their own view was rent to pieces by 122

variously apposite arguments, he whose spirit is for ever the abode of the feet of Mukunda.

May, for the length of this Aeon, play on the pious, enchanting and irreproachable sayings of the extensive collection of prose and verse compositions which eclipse the cleverness of the befuddled, conceited and witless assembly of the evil crowd of the rivals of the Satvata doctrine, whose spirit has been increased by the glorious Nathamunindra, 30 and by which all the unholy powers are cleansed,

