+++
title = "004"
+++
Bhakti Bestows Jñana and Vairagya 
४ । ततश्च “यस्यास्ति भक्तिर्भगवत्यकिञ्चना सर्वैर्गुणैस्तत्र समासते सुराः” ( भा० ५। १८ । १२ ) इत्यनुसारेण भगवत्स्वरूपादिज्ञानं ततोऽन्यत्र वैराग्यं च तदनुगाम्येव स्यादित्याह (भा० ११२१७) - 
IN SRIMAD BHAGAVATA it is said: "The celestial beings along with all their virtues are firmly established in one who has pure devotion to Bhagavan" (SB 5.18.12). According to this statement, immediate awareness (jñānam) of Bhagavan's intrinsic nature and detachment from everything that is not related to Him fol- low in the wake of bhakti. On this consideration, Sūta Gosvāmi makes the following statement: 
1 
वासुदेवे भगवति भक्तियोगः प्रयोजितः । 
जनयत्याशु वैराग्यं ज्ञानं च यदहैतुकम् ॥ ११ ॥ 
Bhakti-yoga that is directed to Bhagavan Vasudeva quickly gives rise to detachment and causeless awareness. (SB 1.2.7)2 
अहैतुकं शुष्कतर्काद्यगोचरमौपनिषदं ज्ञानमाशु ईषच्छ्रवणमात्रेण जनयतीत्यर्थः ॥ 
The word ahaitukam, lit., "without formal cause," as an adjec- tive of awareness (jñānam), means "that which is of the nature of the Upanisadic revelation," which is inaccessible through for- mal logic and other similar means. The adverb aśu, "quickly," 
yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcana sarvair gunais tatra samasate surāḥ 
2 
vasudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitah 
janayaty āšu vairagyaṁ jñānam ca yad ahaitukam 
53 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
implies that such wisdom is induced simply by brief aural reception [of the truth teachings]. 
Commentary 
BHAKTI is sometimes depicted as a lovely woman with two sons, "knowledge" and "detachment" (jñāna and vairāgya). The present verse (SB 1.2.7) confirms the truth of this analogy. When a person is permeated by the consciousness and bliss that devotion to Bha- gavān entails, he or she becomes fully satisfied at heart. This was stated in the previous anuccheda. It naturally follows from this that such a person will also lose interest in material sense pleasure, power, position, and wealth. A person remains attached to these things as long as he is unaware of the superior beatitude available in bhakti. One abandons lower pleasures for a higher one. Thus, detachment from material objects is a natural outcome of bhakti. 
Bhakti also bestows knowledge and direct experience of the Sup- reme Reality. Through the self-revealing power of bhakti, one can immediately intuit how Bhagavan is manifest in the form of the world. Such awareness and experience are not possible by mere logic (cf. Katha Upanisad 1.2.9) When the mind and intellect are under the influence of material desires, they cannot perceive the higher truth. 
The word jñāna in this verse is qualified by the adjective ahai- tukam, "causeless." This refers to that knowledge or insight which is not derived from any material cause. It is self-disclosed by the grace of bhakti. The word jñāna here is not intended in its technical philosophical sense as the intuition of absolute oneness with Brah- man, since that would contradict the basic requirement of bhakti. It refers instead to the awareness of Bhagavan's intrinsic nature and His potencies, such as the living beings and the world. Śrī 
3 
4 
aham bhaktir iti khyāta imau me tanayau matau jñāna-vairagya-nāmānau kāla-yogena jarjarau Padma Purana, Bhāgavata-māhātmya 1.45 
naiṣā tarkena matir āpaneyā 
54 
54 
4 Bhakti Bestows Jñana and Vairagya 
Jiva Gosvāmi refers to it as aupaniṣad-jñānam, knowledge or insight self-disclosed through the Upanisadic revelation. 
Some people operate under the misconception that if one engages in bhakti, there is no need to study sastra. They claim that all knowledge becomes revealed by bhakti alone without any study of sastra. This is not the intention of the verse quoted in this anuccheda (SB 1.2.7). Śrī Jīva thus specifically glosses the word āsu, "quickly," with the phrase iṣac-chravana-matrena - such knowl- edge is induced "simply by a little listening" to the truth teachings of sastra. The point is that without bhakti, one cannot understand śāstra even if heard repeatedly. Being first rooted in devotion, one is meant to hear (śravana), reflect upon (manana), and imme- diately intuit (nididhyasana) the truth disclosed in śāstra. Thus Śvetāśvatara Upanisad says: 
The imports of the teachings described in this Upanisad are revealed only to that elevated soul in whom transcendental devo- tion for Bhagavan is present and who feels the same quality of devotion for his guru as felt for Bhagavan. (su 6.23)5 
In this verse as well, the words kathita hy arthaḥ are highly sig- nificant. They refer to the śästrika imports (arthah) delineated by the guru. This implies that study is itself meant to be undertaken as one of the foundational limbs of bhakti along with the execution of other devotional acts. 
The above-mentioned belief that there is no need to study śāstra is rooted in the misconception that all knowledge priorly exists within the pure self and that its nonmanifestation in the condi- tioned state is no more than the covering of such intrinsic knowl- edge by ignorance. Those who hold this view may even support their idea with recourse to Kṛṣṇa's statement, "The living beings are deluded due to the fact that their knowledge is covered by igno- rance" (GĪTĀ 5.15). It was made clear in the first anuccheda that 
0 
yasya deve para bhaktir yathā deve tatha gurau 
tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahātmanah ajñānenāvṛtam jñānaṁ tena muhyanti jantavah 
55 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
although the ātmā is of the nature of consciousness, it is not origi- nally replete with knowledge but is beginninglessly subject to the prior absence of knowledge. This implies that its cognitive capac- ity, though intrinsic to the self, exists only as the potential to be imbued with knowledge. For further elucidation of this topic, one can refer to Paramātma Sandarbha (Anucchedas 28-29). 
One may then question, what is the significance of Kṛṣṇa's state- ment that knowledge is covered by ignorance? The answer is that knowledge is the potency by which one is able to know objects as they are. The only Reality is Kṛṣṇa, vasudevaḥ sarvam iti (GĪTĀ 7.19). This knowledge, however, is concealed from view by beginning- less ignorance. When this ignorance is dispelled by bhakti, one can see, or in other words "cognize," the Reality. In comment- ing on this verse (GĪTĀ 5.15), Śrī Baladeva Vidyabhuṣaṇa writes that the ignorance (ajñāna) spoken of is the beginningless state of directing one's intentful regard away from Bhagavan, anādi-tad- vaimukhyena ajñānena. The beginningless prior absence of aware- ness signifies that such knowledge never previously existed in the svarupa of the jiva, but the potential exists for it to be disclosed directly to consciousness at some time. Immediately following the Gītā verse under discussion, Śrī Kṛṣṇa says: 
7 
But those for whom such ignorance has been dispelled by immedi- ate awareness of the self- their awareness reveals the Supreme Transcendent, just as the sun illuminates the world. (GĪTĀ 5.16)' 
Returning once again to the discussion of Srimad Bhāgavata 1.2.7, Sūta's statement also implies that one does not have to practice detachment or cultivate jñāna independent of bhakti. The act of studying bhakti-related texts or assimilating knowledge to enhance one's bhakti are in and of themselves acts of bhakti. Moreover, even if the word jñāna is taken to mean the immediate intuition of Brah- man, it would indicate that such jñāna is naturally self-disclosed to one established in devotion to Bhagavan, as a concomitant effect. 
jñānena tu tad ajñānam yesam nasitam ātmanaḥ 
teṣām ādityavaj jñānam prakāśayati tat-param 
56 
4 Bhakti Bestows Jñana and Vairagya 
This is so because Brahman is implicit within Bhagavān (GĪTĀ 14.27, Bhagavat Sandarbha, Anucchedas 6-7). 
In the next anuccheda, Jīva Gosvāmī illustrates the futility of conventional duties when they fail to lead to bhakti. 
57 
57 
