+++
title = "008"
+++
Dharma Culminates in the Pleasure 
of Bhagavan Hari 
८ । सा चैवं दुर्लभा भक्तिः श्रीहरितोषणे प्रयुक्तात् स्वाभाविकधर्मादपि लभ्यते । तस्माद्ध- रितोषणमेव तस्य परमफलमित्याह (भा० १।२।१३ ) - 
THIS RARE BHAKTI, which is as previously described, can be attained even by carrying out the dharma for which one is natu- rally suited with the intent of pleasing Bhagavan Sri Hari. Con- sequently, the pleasure of Bhagavan Hari is itself the supreme fruit of such dharma. In this regard, Sūta Gosvāmī said: 
अतः पुम्भिर्द्विजश्रेष्ठा वर्णाश्रमविभागशः । स्वनुष्ठितस्य धर्मस्य संसिद्धिर्हरितोषणम् ॥ १९ ॥ 
Therefore, O best of the twice-born, the highest perfection of dharma meticulously performed by human beings according to the social divisions related to vocation (varnas) and the various stages of life (asramas) is to please Bhagavan Hari. (SB 1.2.13)1 
स्वनुष्ठितस्य बहुप्रयत्नेनाच्छिद्रमुपार्जितस्येति तुच्छे स्वर्गादिफले तत्प्रयोगोऽतीवायुक्त इति भावः ॥ 
The word sv-anusthitasya, "meticulously performed" [qualify- ing the word dharma], means "that [action] which has attained the quality of freedom from imperfection through sustained 
1atah pumbhir dvija-śrestha varnasrama-vibhāgaśaḥ 
svanusthitasya dharmasya samsiddhir hari-toṣaṇam 
90 
90 
8 Dharma Culminates in the Pleasure of Bhagavan Hari 
effort." The sense is that it is highly improper to carry out one's dharma just to obtain insignificant fruits such as heaven. 
Commentary 
EARLIER it was said that the purpose of one's "own-duty" (sva- dharma) is apavarga ("liberation" or more fundamentally, “bhakti”) and not artha or kama (SB 1.2.9). To further emphasize this point, Śrī Sūta reiterates the same conclusion here, but clarifying more explicitly what is meant by apavarga. He does this in order to soundly refute the view of Purva-mīmāmsā, which was prevalent throughout India. He declares that a person's dharma should be performed with the sole intent of pleasing Bhagavan Hari. 
In the overall approach to ritual action, it is customary to first make a solemn vow, or sankalpa, before initiating a particular task or act of dharma. This sankalpa announces the purpose for which the task is performed. As stipulated in the verse of this anuccheda, the intent of the action should be to please Bhagavan (hari-toṣaṇam). Accordingly, one should then declare, "I undertake this task for the pleasure of Hari" (hari-prity-artham idam karomi). 
A question may be raised in this regard. If a person performs his dharma for the satisfaction of Hari, will he not obtain in addition the normal result that accrues from such dharma or karma? The answer to this question lies in the understanding that the result of an action is in direct correspondence with the performer's intent (sankalpa) and faith (śraddha). Because the person whose sole aspi- ration is to please Hari reposes faith not in karma-yoga but in bhakti, he will not obtain the normal result. This topic is discussed by Śrī Jiva in greater detail in Anuccheda 62. The fact that the results of dharma are tied to the faith of the performer is confirmed by Śrī 
Krsna: 
O son of Prtha, without faith, whatever is offered in the sacrificial fire, whatever is donated in charity, whatever austerity is under- taken, and whatever other auspicious actions are performed, are 
91I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
all termed as asat, or devoid of essential value, because they bear no fruit, either in this life or after death. (GĪTĀ 17.28)2 
Hari, or Kṛṣṇa, is primarily pleased by bhakti and not by karma, jñāna, or yoga (SB 11.14.20). Sūta's statement thus implies that one should abandon conventional dharma and engage exclusively in bhakti, as Krsna instructed Arjuna: 
Fix your mind on Me, become My devotee, worship Me, and bow down to Me. By doing so, you will come to Me. I promise this to you truly, because you are dear to Me. Abandoning completely all [attachment to] conventional duties, seek refuge in Me alone. I will free you from all sins; do not grieve. (GĪTĀ 18.65-66)3 
A bhakta should not be apprehensive that by renouncing dharma, he will incur sin. The abandonment of routine dharma, however, need not necessarily involve complete withdrawal from all external affairs but an internal state of detachment. This means that such a person is in no way dependent upon dharma in the matter of the ultimate good. Out of social convention alone, he or she may continue the outward participation in dharmika acts. Bearing this in mind, Sūta instructs his listeners to engage directly in bhakti in the next verse of the series. 
2 
92 
aśraddhaya hutam dattam tapas taptam kṛtam ca yat asad ity ucyate partha na ca tat pretya no iha 
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru mam evaisyasi satyam te pratijane priyo'si me sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam šaranam vraja aham tvām sarva-papebhyo mokṣayisyami ma śucah 
