+++
title = "018"
+++
Worship Is Intended Only for Sākṣāt-parabrahma Viṣṇu 
१८ | तदेवं कर्मज्ञानवैराग्ययत्नपरित्यागेन भगवद्भक्तिरेव कर्तव्येति मतम् । कर्मविशेष- रूपं देवतान्तरभजनमपि न कर्तव्यमित्याह सप्तभिः । तत्रान्येषां का वार्ता सत्यपि श्री- भगवत एव गुणावतारत्वे श्रीविष्णुवत् साक्षात्परमब्रह्मत्वाभावात् सत्त्वमात्रोपकारक- त्वाभावाच्च प्रत्युत रजस्तमोबृंहणत्वाच्च ब्रह्मशिवावपि श्रेयोऽर्थिभिर्नोपास्यावित्यत्र द्वौ श्लोकौ परमात्मसन्दर्भे एवोदाहृतौ ( भा० १।२।२३-२४ ) - 
IN THIS MANNER, it has been concluded that bhakti to Bhaga- vän is alone to be taken up, by abandoning the endeavor for karma, jñāna, and vairagya. Even the worship of other devatās undertaken as a special act of karma should not be performed, as made evident by Sūta Gosvāmi in the next seven verses. Among the various devatās thus signified, even Brahma and Śiva are not to be worshiped by those seeking the ultimate good, to say nothing of other lower gods. The reason for this is that although Brahma and Śiva are guṇāvatāras of none other than Śrī Bhagavan, unlike Śrī Viṣņu, they lack the primary onto- logical status of being directly the Supreme Absolute Reality (sākṣāt-parabrahma). In addition, they do not promote sattva- guna; rather, they nurture rajas and tamas. In this regard, Śrī Sūta speaks the following two verses, which were also cited in Paramātma Sandarbha [Anucchedas 12-13]: 
131I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
सत्त्वं रजस्तम इति प्रकृतेर्गुणास्तैर्युक्तः परः पुरुष एक इहास्य धत्ते । स्थित्यादये हरिविरिञ्चिहरेति सञ्ज्ञाः श्रेयांसि तत्र खलु सत्त्वतनोर्नृणां स्युः ॥ 
२९ ॥ 
पार्थिवाद् दारुणो धूमस्तस्मादग्निस्त्रयीमयः । 
तमसस्तु रजस्तस्मात् सत्त्वं यद् ब्रह्मदर्शनम् ॥ ३० ॥ 
In this regard, luminosity (sattva), dynamism ( rajas), and sta- sis (tamas) are the universal qualitative constituents (gunas ) of primordial nature (prakrti ). Endowed with these, the one Supreme Immanent Being assumes three names - Hari (Visņu), Viriñci (Brahmā), and Hara (Siva), respectively – for the suste- nance, creation, and dissolution of this material world. Among them, however, the ultimate benefits for humanity ensue from Vişņu alone, who is the direct embodiment of unalloyed being (viśuddha-sattva). 
Just as smoke is superior to firewood, which is a product of the earth, and as fire, which is intimately connected with the ritual acts of the three Vedas (trayimayah), is superior to smoke, so too the universal qualitative principle of dynamism (rajas) is supe- rior to stasis (tamas), yet superior even to dynamism is luminos- ity (sattva), because it conduces to the immediate realization of the Absolute. (SB 1.2.23-24 ) 1 
सत्त्वतनोः सत्त्वशक्तेः । त्रयीमयस्त्रय्युक्तकर्मप्रचुरः । दारुस्थानीयं तमः । धूमस्था- नीयं रजः । अग्निस्थानीय सत्त्वम् । त्रय्युक्तकर्मस्थानीयं ब्रह्म । पार्थिवादिति यथा धूमो ऽशेनाग्रीयो भवति दारु तु तथा नेति अत्र स्वल्पं त्रयीमयत्वं भवति । एवं यथा रजसः सत्त्वसन्निहितत्वं तथा तमसो नेति । ब्रह्मसन्निहितत्वं स्वल्पं ज्ञेयम् । ततश्च त्रय्युक्तकर्म यथाग्नावेव साक्षात् प्रवर्तते नान्ययोस्तद्वत् परब्रह्मभूतो भगवानपि सत्त्व एवेत्यर्थः । 
In the first verse quoted above (SB 1.2.23), the compound sattva- tanoḥ, "from He who is the direct embodiment of unalloyed 
sattvam rajas tama iti prakṛter gunās tair 
yuktaḥ parah purusa eka ihasya dhatte 
sthity-ādaye hari-virindi-hareti sarjnāh 
śreyamsi tatra khalu sattva-tanor nṛṇām syuh 
parthivad daruno dhumas 
tasmad agnis trayimayaḥ 
tamasas tu rajas tasmāt sattvam yad brahma-darśanam 
132 
18 Worship Is Intended Only for Sākṣāt-parabrahma Vişņu 
being," means "from He whose potency is of the nature of sattva" (sattva-sakteḥ). In the second verse (SB 1.2.24), the word trayi- mayaḥ, "which is intimately connected with the ritual acts of the three Vedas" [as an adjective of fire], means "that which abounds with the religious acts described in the three Vedas" (trayy-ukta-karma-pracurah). In the same verse, tamas is com- pared to firewood, rajas to smoke, sattva to fire, and brahma, "the Absolute," to the ritual acts outlined in the three Vedas. 
The meaning of the phrase "smoke is superior to firewood" is as follows: By way of example, smoke is said to be partially endowed with the quality of fire, whereas wood is not simi- larly endowed. In this respect, smoke is minutely constitu- tive of the religious acts of the three Vedas (svalpam trayīma- yatvam). Accordingly, rajas has proximity (sannihitatvam) to sattva, whereas tamas does not have such proximity. In this respect, rajas is understood to have minute proximity to Brah- man (svalpam brahma-sannihitatvam). Therefore, just as the ritual acts that pertain to the three Vedas are directly executed only in fire and not in the other two, so too Bhagavan, who is the Supreme Absolute (Parabrahma), is manifest only in sattva and not in rajas and tamas. 
देवतान्तरपरित्यागेनापि भगवद्भक्तौ सदाचारं प्रमाणयति ( भा० १।२।२५ ) - 
Sūta Gosvāmi offers evidence of the above by reference to the conduct of past sages, who were engaged in bhakti to Bhagavān even to the extent of abandoning all involvement with the other devatās: 
भेजिरे मुनयोऽथाग्रे भगवन्तमधोक्षजम् । 
सत्त्वं विशुद्धं क्षेमाय कल्पन्ते येऽनु तानिह ॥ ३१ ॥ 
Consequently, from time immemorial, the sages worshiped Bha- gavän [Kṛṣṇa], who is beyond the purview of the senses (adho- kṣaja) and the direct embodiment of unalloyed being (visuddha- sattva). Those who follow in their footsteps also become eligible to attain the ultimate good in this world. (SB 1.2.25)2 
2 
bhejire munayo'thagre bhagavantam adhoksajam→ 
133 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
अथ अतो हेतोः । अग्रे पुरा । सत्त्वं विशुद्धं विशुद्धसत्त्वात्मकमूर्तिं भगवन्तम् । प्राकृतस- त्त्वातीतत्वं च तस्य विवृतं (अनु० ९९ ) भगवत्सन्दर्भे । अतो ये ताननु वर्तन्ते त इह संसारे क्षेमाय कल्पन्ते ॥ 
The word atha, "consequently," means, "for the reason just stated [in the two previous verses]" (hetoḥ). The word agre, "from time immemorial," means "in the distant past" (pura). The words sattvam visuddham, qualifying bhagavantam, signify that Bhagavan is the direct embodiment of unalloyed being in His essential constitution (visuddha-sattvātmaka-mūrti). This viśuddha-sattva is transcendental to the material sattva that belongs to prakṛti, as discussed already in Bhagavat Sandarbha (Anuccheda 99). Therefore, those who follow these sages (ye tān anu) - they, in this world (iha), meaning, "in the context of conditional existence" (samsara), become eligible to attain the ultimate good (kṣemāya). 
Commentary 
HAVING established that bhakti alone is the abhidheya, and not karma, jñāna, or yoga, Śrī Sūta now specifies with reference to logic that bhakti is to be directed exclusively toward Bhagavan, and not to the devas. It was explained in the very first volume of this anthology (Tattva Sandarbha), that there is only one non- dual reality (advaya-tattva), broadly designated by the three terms Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavan. Among them, Bhagavan is the most complete self-disclosure of the tattva. Although one, Bhagavan has innumerable manifestations, called avatāras. In this connection, Akrura addressed Kṛṣṇa as "He who encom- passes many forms in a single form" (bahu-mürty-eka-mürtikam, SB 10.40.7). According to Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta (1.2.4), there are three types of avatāras - puruṣāvatāras, guṇāvatāras, and līlāvatā- ras. The first two categories of avatāras were described in Parama- tma Sandarbha (Anucchedas 2-18) and the third, in Kṛṣṇa Sandarbha (Anucchedas 6-27). 
sattvam visuddham kṣemaya kalpante ye'nu tän iha 
134 
18 Worship Is Intended Only for Sākṣāt-parabrahma Vişņu 
The puruṣāvatāras and lilāvatāras are all manifestations of Bha- gavan's intrinsic potency, viśuddha-sattva, or cit-sakti. These avatā- ras are all worshipable and designated as Bhagavān. The guṇā- vatāras are three in number, corresponding to their involvement with the three gunas of maya-sakti. Visņu, Brahma, and Śiva are the guṇāvatāras and are related respectively to sattva, rajas, and tamas. Among them, only Visnu is to be worshiped, owing to His ontological status of being directly the Supreme Reality. This is the import of SB 1.2.23, cited in this anuccheda. Although the Sup- reme Puruşa accepts the gunas for the purpose of the creation, sus- tenance, and dissolution of the cosmos, He remains untouched by them, by virtue of His transrational potency. This is the sense of the word parah. 
In SB 1.2.23, Visnu is referred to as sattva-tanu, "the direct embodiment of sattva," or "He whose form is of the essence of sattva." The word sattva here does not mean the sattva-guna belong- ing to māyā-sakti, as is misconstrued by Advaitavādīs. This is a cru- cial distinction that must be clearly understood; otherwise, Viṣṇu would be virtually indistinguishable from the other devas. This sattva refers to visuddha-sattva, or the state of unalloyed being, as explicitly mentioned two verses later in SB 1.2.25, cited at the end of this anuccheda. Although Bhagavan Visnu presides over the sattva- guna of prakṛti, He remains uninfluenced by it. Sattva is illuminat- ing (prakāśa) and gives rise to detachment, but it has no power to influence or condition Visņu, who is the embodiment of visuddha- sattva, signifying that He is the very source of all illumination, existence, consciousness, and bliss (sac-cid-ananda-mūrti). 
Rajas and tamas, however, have the natures of perpetual distrac- tion (vikṣepa) and concealment (avaraṇa), respectively, and thus they impose corresponding limitations on the forms of Brahma and Śiva, whose bodies are rājasika and tāmasika. What this means is that Brahma and Śiva come in contact with rajas and tamas and thus become delimited by them. Visņu, on the other hand, is alto- gether devoid of the material gunas and conducts the function of 
135 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
cosmic sustenance through material sattva merely by His proxim- ity to it, without actually entering into the direct relations of con- tact (samyoga) or inherence (samavaya). His relation to the world is determined as that of niyamaka ("the regulator") and niyamya ("the regulated"). On such a formal basis, He appears to be indif- ferent to universal affairs. It is to be noted, however, that He pro- vides knowledge and inspiration regarding bhakti as the means of His attainment and nourishes His devotees through His intrinsic potency (viśuddha-sattva). 
Brahma is a highly evolved jiva who is empowered by Visņu to carry out the function of secondary creation (visarga). His body is not a manifestation of viśuddha-sattva, as is evident from the following statement of Brahma-samhita: 
I worship the original Puruşa, Śrī Govinda, who manifests a por- tion of His power in Brahma as the creator of the universal egg, just as the sun projects a fragment of its own effulgence into the "sun-crystals." (BS 5.49)3 
Śiva, on the other hand, is not a jīva. He is Iśvara endowed with a guna of prakṛti. To this effect, Brahma-samhita says: 
I worship the original Puruşa, Sri Govinda, who assumes the form of Sambhu [Siva] for the purpose of cosmic dissolution, yet that form [of Sambhu] is in no way distinct from its originating cause, just as milk transforms into yogurt through contact with a catalytic agent, although yogurt is not distinct from the milk that is its cause. (BS 5.45)4 
The worship of this trinity can be undertaken either from the perspective that each member bears the upadhi, or "limitation," of 
3 
4 
bhāsvan yathasma-sakaleṣu nijesu tejaḥ 
sviyam kiyat prakaṭayaty api tadvad atra 
brahma ya esa jagad-anda-vidhana-kartā govindam adi-puruṣam tam aham bhajāmi kṣiram yatha dadhi vikara-višesa-yogāt sanjayate na tu tatah prthag asti hetoh 
yah sambhutam api tatha samupaiti käryäd govindam adi purusam tam aham bhajami 
136 
18 Worship Is Intended Only for Säkṣāt-parabrahma Vişnu 
his respective guna, or that they are transcendental to the gunas. In the latter case, the transcendence of Brahma and Śiva is on the basis of their being partial manifestations of Paramātmā, whereas Viṣṇu is Paramātmā Himself. If Brahma and Śiva are worshiped with the view that they have upadhis, then they cannot grant liber- ation, and even the boons of dharma, artha, and kama that ensue from them will not be particularly salutary. This is because the gunas of rajas and tamas are distressful and delusive, respectively. Liberation (mokşa), however, is not possible through the worship of these two devatās delimited by their respective adjuncts (upadhis). On the other hand, even if one worships them as free of upādhis, liberation is attained only belatedly, and this too comes about as a result of considering them to be integrated portions of Paramātmā. In essence, liberation ensues only from Paramātmā, Śrī Viṣņu, and certainly not from Brahma or Śiva directly. 
In contrast to the above, if one worships Visņu as delimited by sattva, one can still obtain dharma, artha, and kama from Him, and in this case such benefits will be congenial, because sattva is peace- ful by nature. If Visnu is worshiped without any such material motive, then one can also attain mokṣa. This again is due to the illu- minating power of sattva that leads to mokṣa. If, however, Visņu is worshiped as devoid of limiting adjuncts (upādhis), one will attain bhakti, the fifth and ultimate human value, beyond dharma, artha, kāma, and mokṣa. Bhakti proceeds only from Paramātmā, not from any presiding deity of the gunas. 
In conclusion, a deva, such as Śiva, can be worshiped along the following lines: 
1. As the independent Supreme Bhagavan. This is the view of the 
Śaivites. 
2. As the presiding deity of an aspect of the material energy, such 
as tamas. 
3. As a devotee of Bhagavan Visņu. 
4. As a partial manifestation of Visņu. 
137 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
5. As an existential seat (adhisthāna) occupied by Visnu. In this capacity, Śiva is regarded as an agent or representative of 
Visņu, being endowed with His powers. It is Visņu who is then worshiped through Śiva. 
Among these possibilities, the first mode of worship is con- traindicated because it contradicts Siva's own ontological status, and on this basis it is said to lead to degradation. The second mode of worship can grant only temporal material benefits. The remain- ing three modes of worship can bestow the highest benefit. This is the extended significance of SB 1.2.23. 
In the next verse (SB 1.2.24), Śrī Sūta provides an example to make this point clear. Of the three gunas of primordial nature - tamas, rajas, and sattva - the latter, whose nature is to illuminate, is superior to the previous two, which act to conceal and distract. Because sattva is not opposed to visuddha-sattva, it is helpful in coming to know the Absolute. By itself, however, sattva cannot disclose the vision of Reality, brahma-darśanam. The fact that the worship of Viṣṇu bestows the ultimate good is confirmed by the experience of past sages, as pointed out in SB 1.2.25. They too were engaged in the worship of Bhagavan, who is addressed in the verse as Adhokṣaja, "He who is beyond sense perception." Those who fol- low in the footsteps of these sages attain freedom from bondage (ksema). 
According to SB 1.2.24, rajas is superior to tamas, and sattva is superior to rajas. In conformity with this principle, Brahma would then be adjudged as superior to Śiva, and Visņu as superior to Brahma. From the description of Puranic cosmology, it is under- stood that Brahmā takes birth from Visnu, and thereafter Siva is born from Brahma. This would seem to support the hierarchy sug- gested in SB 1.2.24. From the following statement of Śiva, however, it appears that Śiva is superior to Brahma: 
A person scrupulously devoted to his occupational duty for one hundred lifetimes becomes eligible to occupy the post of Brahmā. One who is yet more qualified can attain my abode, which is beyond even that. A worshiper of Bhagavan Viṣṇu, however, 
138 
18 Worship Is Intended Only for Sakṣat-parabrahma Viṣṇu 
attains to the abode of Vişņu, which transcends all phenomenal- ity, just as I and other devas attain that very destination after the dissolution of the subtle body. (SB 4.24.29)5 
The view that Śiva is of a higher ontological category of being than Brahma is supported by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmi, who reasons that out of the 64 primordial qualities of being that are intrinsic to the Supreme Reality, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śiva is endowed with five more than Brahma (BRS 2.1.37). This conclusion is also verified by Brahma- samhita (5.45), cited above, which establishes Śiva as belonging to a unique category of being, beyond the jivas, of whom Brahma is the highest possible development. 
To reconcile these two apparently contradictory views, a dou- ble scale of evaluation is required. From the point of view of functional jurisdiction related to the material gunas, the hierar- chy is as given in SB 1.2.24. From the standpoint of ontological primacy, however, Śiva is superior and nearest in being to Visņu. Moreover, among devotees of Visņu, Śiva is said to be the highest ideal (SB 12.13.16). From this analysis, it is concluded that although Brahmā appears externally to be superior to Siva (i.e., from the per- spective of administrative functionality), internally, or from the perspective of constitutional make-up, it is the other way around. Even in regard to the example of smoke and wood, it is to be noted that wood has fire concealed in its constitution, whereas smoke contains only a small measure of heat. As such, wood can be transformed into fire but not smoke. So, just as wood is concealed fire, Śiva is concealed Visņu. Consequently, in the list of offenses against the holy name, it is Śiva who is estimated as proximate to Vişņu and not Brahmā. 
It is interesting to note that Śri Jīva Gosvāmi compares the karma prescribed in the Vedas to Brahman, trayy-ukta-karma- sthāniyam brahma. This implies that the true purpose of Vedic karma is to gain factual experience of Reality in the course of the pursuit and attainment of heaven. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also confirms 
5 
sva-dharma-nisthaḥ śata-janmabhiḥ pumän virincatām eti tataḥ param hi mām avyakṛtam bhagavato'tha vaisnavam padam yathahaṁ vibudhaḥ kalatyaye 
139 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
that a person can attain perfection by devoutly carrying out his or her occupational duty (GĪTĀ 18.45), and that people such as Janaka attained perfection solely through attentive execution of motiveless karma (GĪTĀ 3.20). 
In the next verse, Śrī Sūta continues to affirm that ultimate value is to be attained only through the worship of Visņu. 
140 
