+++
title = "020"
+++
Worship in the Gunas Is Influenced by Acquired Nature 
२० । ननु कामलाभोऽपि लक्ष्मीपतिभजने भवत्येव । तर्हि कथमन्यांस्ते भजन्ते ? तत्राह (મા૦ારાર૭) – 
— 
IT MAY then be questioned that since even material desires can indeed be fulfilled through the worship of Bhagavan Nārāyaṇa, the husband of the Goddess of Fortune, why do people who harbor such desires worship other devas? Sūta addresses this question in the next verse: 
रजस्तमः प्रकृतयः समशीला भजन्ति वै । पितृभूतप्रजेशादीन् श्रियैश्वर्यप्रजेप्सवः ॥ ३३ ॥ 
Those whose natures are of the qualitative essence of rajas and tamas and whose character is thus accordant [with those whom they regard] worship only the forefathers, the spirit entities, the progenitors, and so on, being covetous of wealth, power, and progeny. (SB 1.2.27)1 
रजस्तमः प्रकृतित्वेनैव पित्रादिभिः समं शीलं येषां समशीलत्वादेव तद्भजने प्रवृत्तिरित्य- 2f: 11 
1 
It is specifically due to the fact that their natures are influenced by rajas and tamas that their character accords with that of 
rajas tamaḥ prakṛtayaḥ sama-sīlā bhajanti vai pitr-bhūta-praješadin śriyaiśvarya-prajepsavaḥ 
144 
20 Worship in the Gunas Is Influenced by Acquired Nature 
the forefathers, the spirit entities, and the progenitors. And because they share an identity of character, they are predis- posed to worship the forefathers and so on. This is the intended 
sense. 
Commentary 
BHAGAVAN VISNU can fulfill all the desires of His devotee, be it a desire for material enjoyment, liberation, or bhakti, as Śrī Kṛṣṇa informs Uddhava: 
If My devotee should somehow aspire for heaven, liberation, or res- idence in My abode, he can easily attain all of these by bhakti-yoga unto Me. (SB 11.20.33)2 
In this regard, Śrī Suka advises everyone to worship only Śrī Visņu, no matter what their aspiration might be: 
A person of evolved discernment, whether desireless, full of desire, or seeking liberation, should worship the Supreme Purusa with resolute bhakti-yoga. (SB 2.3.10)3 
In light of this consideration, it must then be questioned why people take to the worship of other entities instead of worshiping Vişņu alone. Śrī Sūta addresses this very question in the verse cited here. The answer is that everyone is naturally drawn to an object of worship that accords with their own nature (sama-sila). Every- one's faith is in correspondence with their nature, as affirmed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa: 
2 sarvam mad-bhakti-yogena mad-bhakto labhate nijasā svargāpavargam mad-dhama kathañcid yadi vañchati 1akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā moksa-kāma udara-dhiḥ tivrena bhakti-yogena yajeta puruşam param 
145 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
O descendant of Bharata, everyone's faith is according to their indi- vidual psychological make-up. The empirical self is in fact a by- product of faith. Therefore, whatever faith a person demonstrates is exactly the faith with which he is endowed. (GITĀ 17.3)* 
Worship culminates in a cordial relation, and this occurs between beings of the same nature. Birds of the same feather naturally flock together. Although different people are drawn to worship different deities, the Vedic scriptures ultimately recom- mend worship of Krsna alone. To support this conclusion, Śrī Sūta speaks the two verses discussed in the next anuccheda. 
146 
sattvānurupā sarvasya śraddha bhavati bhārata śraddha-mayo'yam puruso yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva sah 
