+++
title = "040"
+++
Without the Affect of Bhakti, 
the Heart Does Not Melt 
४० ॥ भा० २ । ३ । २४- 
ŚRI SAUNAKA then said to Śrī Sūta: 
तदश्मसारं हृदयं बतेदं यद् गृह्यमाणैर्हरिनामधेयैः । 
न विक्रियेताथ यदा विकारो नेत्रे जलं गात्ररुहेषु हर्षः ।। ५९ ।। 
Alas, the heart that does not melt while reciting the names of Bhagavan Hari is of the essence of stone. Otherwise, when the heart does melt, tears flow from the eyes and the hairs of the body stand on end in ecstasy. (SB 2.3.24 ) 1 
अश्मवत् सारो बलं काठिन्यं यस्य । विक्रियालक्षणमथेति । यदा तद्विकारो न भवेत् तदा नेत्रादौ जलादिकं न भवतीत्यर्थः । इदमेवान्वयेन श्रीमता राज्ञा दृढीकरिष्यते "सा वाग् यया तस्य गुणान् गृणीते” (भा० १० १८०१३) इत्यादिभ्याम् । तदेवं श्रीशुकवाक्यारम्भा- ध्यायत्रयाभिधेयत्वेन श्रीभक्तिरेव लब्धा । 
The compound aśma-sāram, "whose essence is stone," indicates that the heart of such a person has the hardness and rigidity of stone. The symptoms of melting are described in the second half of the verse, beginning with the word atha, "otherwise." The sense is that when the heart does not melt, symptoms such as tears in the eyes do not become manifest. 
1 tad-aśma sāram hrdayar batedari yad grhyamānair hari nāma dheyaih 
na vikriyetatha yada vikaro netre jalam gatra-ruheşu harṣaḥ 
232 
40 Without the Affect of Bhakti, the Heart Does Not Melt 
King Parikṣit confirms the very same idea [that bhakti is the abhidheya] through anvaya, or "positive concomitance." In this regard, he speaks two verses, beginning with: "That speech by which the glories of Bhagavan are extolled is authentic speech..." (SB 10.80.3) 
Thus it is evidenced that in the first three chapters [of the Sec- ond Canto], which are the beginning of Sri Sukadeva's discourse, bhakti alone is determined as the abhidheya. 
टीका च (भा० दी० २१११, भा० दी० २ २ ११, भा० दी० २।३।१) - 
Śrīdhara Svāmi also composed verses to this effect in the begin- ning of his commentary on each of the first three chapters, as follows: 
तत्र तु प्रथमेऽध्याये कीर्तणश्रवणादिभिः । 
स्थविष्ठे भगवद्रूपे मनसो धारणोच्यते ॥ ६० ॥ 
द्वितीये तु ततः स्थूलधारणातो जितं मनः । 
सर्वसाक्षिणि सर्वेशे विष्णौ धार्यमितीर्यते ॥ ६१ ॥ तृतीये विष्णुभक्तेस्तु वैशिष्ट्यं शृण्वतो मुनेः । 
भक्त्युद्रेकेण तत्कर्मश्रवणादर ईर्यते ॥ ६२ ॥ इत्येषा ॥ 
श्रीशौनकः श्रीसूतम् ॥ 
2 
3 
The first chapter describes the process of fixing the mind on the Virat form of Bhagavan, through glorification of Bhagavan, hearing about Him, and so on. (Bhāvārtha-dipika 2.1.1)* 
The second chapter discusses the method of fixing the mind on Bhagavan Visņu, who is the witness of all and the Supreme 
The abhidheyatva of bhakti through vyatireka, or "negative concomitance," was demonstrated in the series of eight verses spoken by Saunaka, beginning with SB 2.3.17, Anuccheda 33, and ending here (SB 2.3.24). Śrī Jiva now establishes the same conclusion through anvaya, or "positive concomitance." Since the negative concomitance began with an illustration of inauthentic or idle speech (in SB 2.3.17), Śrī Jiva now provides its positive counterpart with an example of authentic speech, meaning that which pertains to Bhagavan. 
sā vāg yaya tasya gunan grnite 
4 tatra tu prathame'dhyaye kirtana-sravaṇādibhiḥ 
sthavişte bhagavad-rupe manaso dhāranocyate 
233 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
Immanent Regulator. This practice is taken up once the mind has been subdued by meditation on the gross Cosmic Form [Virät]. (Bhāvārtha-dipikā 2.2.1)5 
The third chapter relates how Śaunaka Muni, after hearing of the eminence of bhakti to Bhagavan Visņu, speaks with over- flowing devotion about the honor of hearing about the divine acts of Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa. (Bhāvārtha-dipikā 2.3.1)6 
Commentary 
AFTER condemning the life, body, and external limbs of individ- uals devoid of bhakti to Bhagavan, Śrī Saunaka reproaches their inner feeling sense, the heart. Earlier, he criticized only those who are altogether devoid of devotional acts, but now he addresses even those who repeat the names of Bhagavan with a heart destitute of bhakti. This criticism involves much graver consequences than that which applies to those who do not recite the names at all. This is due to the fact that the practitioner, while formally adopting prac- tices (sammukhyata), remains inwardly contracted upon a separate self-sense (vaimukhyata). Thus, Saunaka's true intention is that one should take to devotion wholeheartedly and not just engage in devotional acts superficially or out of the separate sense of doership (prthak-bhāva). 
The word "heart" (hrdaya) here does not refer to the physical organ but the inner faculty of feeling-awareness, citta. Citta melts in the fire of love and becomes soft. How does one detect that the heart has melted? It is known by external indicators of existen- tial ecstasy, called sättvika-bhāvas, which are eight in number, as enumerated in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu: 
5 
15 
Becoming stunned (stambha), perspiration (sveda), horripilation (romanca), alteration or faltering of the voice (svara-bheda), trem- bling of the body (vepathu), change of bodily hue (vaivarnya), tears 
dvitiye tu tatah sthula-dharanato jitam manaḥ sarva-saksini sarvese vişnau dharyam itiryate 
tṛtiye vişnu-bhaktes tu vaisistyam śṛnvato muneḥ bhakty udrekena tat-karma-śravaṇādara iryate 
234 
40 Without the Affect of Bhakti, the Heart Does Not Melt 
(aśru), and loss of all external awareness (pralaya) are known as the eight sättvika-bhavas. (BRS 2.3.16)' 
Śrī Saunaka mentions only two of the eight sättvika-bhāvas in the verse under discussion. It should be noted here that these symptoms are not invariably related (avyabhicāri) with the melting of the heart. It is possible to induce or imitate these symptoms with- out the genuine transformation of consciousness that such melt- ing entails. On the other hand, a completely realized devotee may not exhibit these symptoms even when his or her heart is already melted out of love. 
Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti comments that the heart of the prac- titioner fails to melt because of the influence of offenses. If exam- ined closely, all the offenses to the name amount to specific forms of vaimukhyata that the practitioner still clings to inwardly. These offenses become holding patterns of disaffected regard that block the self-disclosure of the name. The name of Bhagavan is nondiffer- ent from Bhagavan, who is the personification of love, but offenses harden the heart, causing it to contract more rigidly on a sepa- rated self. If one utters the name in this condition, the heart does not melt, even if tears come to the eyes as a mere semblance or imitation of the sättvika-bhāvas. Such a heart is compared to an adamantine stone (aśma-sara), as for example a diamond, which is supposed to be the hardest and most impenetrable of all. 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi concludes this anuccheda by citing three verses composed by Śrīdhara Svāmī, who writes a verse at the begin- ning of his commentary to each chapter, summarizing its contents. From these three verses it is clear that in his opinion, bhakti is the abhidheya established in the first three chapters of the Second Canto. 
The two verses spoken by Mahārāja Parīkṣit, referred to in Śrī Jiva's commentary, are as follows: 
7 
That speech by which the glories of Bhagavan are extolled is authentic speech; the hands that render service to Him are hands 
te stambha-sveda-romancaḥ svara-bhedo'tha vepathuḥ 
vaivarṇyam aśru pralaya ity astau sättvikaḥ smṛtah 
235 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
in the true sense; the mind that recognizes Him as immanent in all moving and unmoving beings is factually a mind; and the ear that hears His holy topics is veritably an ear. The head that bows to both moving and unmoving beings as embodiments of Him is a head in reality; the eye that perceives only Him in their forms is an eye that truly sees; and the limbs that constantly serve the sacred water that has washed the feet of Visnu and His devotees are alone worthy to be called limbs. (SB 10.80.3-4) 
In the next two anucchedas, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi refers to the dia- logue between Brahma and his son Narada, in his ongoing effort to establish bhakti as the abhidheya of Srimad Bhagavata. 
236 
sā vāg yayā tasya gunan grnite karau ca tat-karma-karau manaś ca smared vasantam sthira-jangameşu srnoti tat-punya-kathaḥ sa karṇaḥ siras tu tasyobhaya-lingam anamet tad eva yat pasyati tad dhi cakṣuḥ angāni vişnor atha taj-janānāṁ pädodakam yani bhajanti nityam 
5 Brahma Instructs Nārada 
Anucchedas 41-42 
