+++
title = "053"
+++
Rṣabhadeva Recommends Bhakti 
५३ । श्रीऋषभदेवकृतस्वपुत्रशिक्षणेऽपि “ये वा मयीशे” ( भा०५।५।३) इत्यादिकम् "मत्तोऽप्यनन्तात् ” ( भा० ५।५।२५) इत्यादिकं चाग्रे दर्शनीयम् । 
IN THE TEACHINGS of Sri Rṣabhadeva to His sons as well, [bhakti is established as the abhidheya]. This is indicated in statements of His such as: "Those who consider love for Me, Bhagavan, as their one and only object of attainment... [are truly beings of the highest nobility (mahāntaḥ)]" (SB 5.5.3), and, "My unalloyed devotees do not desire anything even from one such as Me, who am unlimited, superior even to the foremost [i.e., Brahma], and intrinsically self-endowed with the capacity to award heaven or liberation" (SB 5.5.25)? These statements will be elaborated later [the former in Anuccheda 186 and the latter in Anuccheda 165]. 
ब्राह्मणरहूगणसंवादान्तेऽपीदमस्ति ( भा०५।१३ ।२० ) - 
Additionally, in the conclusion of the dialogue between the brahmana Jada Bharata] and King Rahugana, the following statement is found: 
1 
2 
रहूगण त्वमपि ह्यध्वनोऽस्य सन्न्यस्तदण्डः कृतभूतमैत्रः । 
असज्जितात्मा हरिसेवया शितं ज्ञानासिमादाय तरातिपारम् ॥ ८५ ॥ 
O Rahūgaṇa, you too are a traveler along this path. Therefore, now give up the business of punishing people, become a friend 
ye vă mayise krta-sauhrdärtha 
matto'py anantat paratah parasmāt svargāpavargadhipater na kincit 
289 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
to all living beings, and remaining inwardly detached from sense objects, cross beyond this path by taking up the sword of knowledge sharpened by seva to Bhagavan Hari. (SB 5.13.20)3 
ज्ञानमत्र भक्त्याश्रयत्वमेव || 
The knowledge (jñāna) referred to in this verse is specifically that which functions under the shelter of bhakti. 
Commentary 
RSABHADEVA is the eighth avatāra listed by Sūta Gosvāmi in the third chapter of the First Canto. The account of His life and teach- ings is described in the Fifth Canto, chapters 3-6. He had one hun- dred sons. The eldest was Bharata, from whose name India derives its own name as Bharata. Rṣabhadeva taught His sons the path of supreme enlightenment (päramahamsya-dharma) and specifically recommended bhakti. The two verses cited in this anuccheda from the fifth chapter of the Fifth Canto are part of His instructions. 
When Ṛṣabhadeva retired, Bharata took over the kingdom. Bharata, however, renounced his post while still a young man and journeyed to the Himalayas to engage in bhakti in a solitary place. There, by mysterious circumstances, he became attached to a fawn, though he was on the very cusp of enlightenment. Because of this fixation, he was born as a deer in his next life. As a deer, his previous consciousness remained intact. As such, he was able to remember his past life and remained aloof from his herd members. 
After death, Bharata was born again as a brāhmaṇa. In this birth, he recalled his two previous births. This time, he was espe- cially determined to remain completely introverted in all his deal- ings so that there would be no possibility of becoming attached to anybody or anything. As a result of his dull outward demeanor, he was thought by everyone to be idle-minded, and so he became known as Jada Bharata, lit., "Bharata the dullard." Jada means stupid, dull, or inanimate like a stone. 
3 
rahugana tvam api hy adhvano'sya sannyasta-dandah kṛta-bhūta-maitrah asaj-jitātmā hari-sevayā šitam jñānāsim ādāya tarāti-pāram 
290 
53 Rṣabhadeva Recommends Bhakti 
Once while wandering in a forest, he was pressed into the ser- vice of carrying King Rahugana's palanquin. The king also criti- cized him for disbalancing the carriage by his odd manner of walk- ing. As soon as Bharata began to reply, however, the king immedi- ately realized his mistake of having offended a sage and beseeched him for forgiveness. Out of compassion, Jada Bharata then offered spiritual instruction to the king. In the verse cited here (SB 5.13.20), he advised King Rahūgaṇa to take to bhakti as the means to traverse the path of samsara. Hearing the instructions of Jada Bharata, King Rahugaṇa felt blessed and spoke the two verses of gratitude that are discussed in the next anuccheda. 
29112 Rahūgana Addresses Jada Bharata 
