+++
title = "060"
+++
The Unswerving Nature of Bhakti 
६० । तत्र यद्यपि " कायेन वाचा मनसेन्द्रियैर्वा" (भा० ११ १२ १३६) इत्यादिप्राक्तनवाक्ये लौकिकस्यापि कर्मणो भगवदर्पणाद् भागवतधर्मत्वं सिध्यतीति यथोक्तं तथा नैरन्तर्य- मपि सम्भवति । तथापि श्रवणकीर्तनादिलक्षणमात्रत्वं व्याहन्येत तस्मात् तत्राव्यभिचा- रित्वं तन्मात्रत्वं च यथा भवेत् तथोपायं तदनन्तरमाह द्वाभ्याम् । 
FROM THE section of verses just referred to [SB 11.2.33-37], it may be deduced that even worldly action (laukika-karma) becomes of the nature of bhāgavata-dharma by virtue of its being offered to Bhagavan. This idea draws support from the previous verse: 
Whatever actions one performs with the body, speech, mind, senses, intellect, and heart, being impelled by one's own nature, should be offered to the Supreme Transcendence, Nārāyaṇa. (SB 11.2.36)1 
Additionally, on the basis of what is expressed in the latter verse, the unbroken continuity (nairantaryam) of bhakti [referred to at the end of the previous anuccheda] would also be rendered possible. This conclusion, however, contradicts the fact that bhakti is distinguished exclusively by direct devotional acts, such as hearing about and singing the glories of Bhagavan. In consideration of this, Śri Kavi thereafter speaks the next two verses to resolve in what manner bhakti can uphold its status of being unswerving (avyabhicăritvam), while preserving its 
1 
kayena vācā manasendriyair va buddhyatmanā vānusṛta-svabhāvāt 
karoti yad yat sakalaṁ parasmai nārāyaṇāyeti samarpayet tat 
333 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
nature of being constituted solely of direct devotional acts, such as hearing and glorification (tan-mătratvam). 
तत्र प्रथममव्यभिचारित्वोपायमाह प्रथमेन (भा० ११ १२ १३८) - 
Out of these two characteristics, the means by which bhakti can be enacted in an unswerving manner (avyabhicăritvam) is discussed in the first verse. [The second characteristic (tan- mātratvam) will be described in SB 11.2.39, quoted in the next anuccheda.] 
अविद्यमानोऽप्यवभाति हि द्वयो ध्यातुर्धिया स्वप्नमनोरथौ यथा । तत्कर्मसङ्कल्पविकल्पकं मनो बुधो निरुन्ध्यादभयं ततः स्यात् ॥ ९७ ॥ 
Although the duality of the visible world is without substan- tial existence, it appears as though real to the cognitive faculty of the perceiver, just as dream objects and mental fantasies, although unreal, appear real to the dreamer. Therefore, a per- son of awakened discernment should first discipline the mind, which sways constantly between resolution and indecision per- taining to action. From this [i.e., by devotion (bhaktyā) in which attention is never deviated by the dualistic nature of perception (ekaya)], fearlessness will ensue. (SB 11.2.38)2 
द्वयः प्रधानादिद्वैतप्रपञ्चो यद्यप्यविद्यमान आत्मनि शुद्धे न विद्यत एवेत्यर्थः । तथापि ध्या- तुरविद्यामयध्यानयुक्तस्य सतस्तस्य धिया अवभाति तस्मिन् शुद्धेऽपि कल्प्यत एवेत्य- र्थः । यथा स्वप्नो मनोरथश्च तथेत्यर्थः । “तत्” तस्मात् । कर्माणि सङ्कल्पयति विकल्पयति च यन् मनस्तन् नियच्छेत् । ततश्चाव्यभिचारिण्या भक्त्या भजनादभयं स्यादिति भावः ॥ 
1 
The word dvayah, "duality," means, "the visible world of duality, beginning from primordial matter in its as yet unmanifested state (pradhana)." That the visible world of duality is without substantial existence (avidyamanaḥ) means that it assuredly does not exist in the pure self (atmani). Although this is the case, it appears as though real to the cognitive faculty (dhiya) of the perceiver (dhyātuḥ), meaning to the person whose delibera- tion is rooted in ignorance (avidya). This means that although 
avidyāmāno'py avabhati hi dvayo dhyātur dhiya svapna-mano-rathau yathā tat-karma-sankalpa-vikalpakaṁ mano budho nirundhyad abhayam tataḥ syāt 
2 
334 
60 The Unswerving Nature of Bhakti 
the self is pure, duality is imagined as real in the same way that night dreams and daydreams appear real to the dreamer. Therefore, one should discipline the mind, which sways con- stantly between resolution and indecision pertaining to action. From this (tatah), meaning by devotion (bhaktyā) enacted in this unswerving manner (avyabhicarinya), fearlessness will ensue. 
Commentary 
ŚRI JIVA's intent in this anuccheda is to demonstrate the unbro- ken continuity (nairantaryam) and the unswerving nature of bhakti (avyabhicāritvam). The question that naturally arises in this regard is how can bhakti be continuously unbroken when the demands of life and the body necessitate that one be diverted into routine actions, such as eating, sleeping, bathing, and so on? Unbroken continuity of sadhana seems an impossibility. 
One possible solution to this dilemma is to propose that even routine actions become of the nature of bhagavata-dharma when offered to Bhagavan. This idea draws support from Sri Kavi's statement in SB 11.2.36. Śrī Jīva points out that although this strat- egy would effectively make possible bhakti's unbroken continuity (nairantaryam), it would contradict the fact that bhakti is consti- tuted exclusively of direct devotional acts, such as hearing about and singing the glories of Bhagavan. 
Here, Śrī Jiva clearly distinguishes between karmarpaṇam, the offering of one's karma to Krsna, and direct bhakti. Karmarpaṇam is spoken of in SB 11.2.36 and bhakti in SB 11.2.37. Karmarpanam can support only one of the three qualities of bhakti mentioned in the previous anuccheda, namely, its unbroken continuity (nairanta- ryam). By its very nature, action of one kind or another is necessar- ily an unbroken continuum, as affirmed by Śrī Krsna Himself: "No one can ever remain even for a moment without performing action" (GĪTĀ 3.5). On this basis, karmarpanam would certainly make possi- ble the nairantaryam of bhakti. But karmarpanam lacks the essential nature of bhakti's being constituted exclusively of direct devotional 
335 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
acts, such as hearing about and singing the glories of Bhagavan. As such, an alternate solution to the dilemma must be proposed. 
In consideration of this fact, Śrī Kavi next points out the means by which bhakti may be undertaken in an unswerving manner (avyabhicăritvam) in the principal verse of this anuccheda (SB 11.2.38). To understand Kavi's solution, we must bear in mind what was stated in the previous verse (SB 11.2.37). There it was mentioned that fear arises from the absorption in that which is sec- ondary (dvitiya, meaning the body and its relations), which in turn is rooted in the misidentification of the self with the body, owing to primordial ignorance. Kavi recommended one-pointed bhakti as the means to redress this beginninglessly reversed condition. 
In the present verse (SB 11.2.38), Kavi continues to analyze the problem of duality. Here we learn that duality is not just of the external world, but of the perceptual apparatus and the mind itself, which sways constantly between resolution and indecision in regard to action. This tells us that the primary obstacle to bhakti's unswervingness (avyabhicāritvam) lies not so much in the nature of action but in that of the mind, since even when routine action is offered to Bhagavan, the mind is easily led astray to other thoughts. As long as the mind remains undisciplined, which is to say, as long as one fails to see through and transcend the dualistic nature of perception and the perceiving instrument, unswervingness (avya- bhicăritvam) becomes an impossibility. Due to ignorance, a person identifies with his or her mind and body. This gives rise to duality in the form of attraction and aversion, rāga and dvesa. This occurs naturally or instinctively, because our senses are designed in this manner to facilitate basic life functioning, as pointed out by Śrī 
3 
Krsna: 
Attachment and aversion pertaining to the sense faculties are rooted in their corresponding sensory objects. One should not come under the sway of such attachment and aversion, for they are impediments to the spiritual aspirant. (GĪTA 3.34) 
indriyasyendriyasyarthe raga-dvesau vyavasthitau 
tayor na vašam āgacchet tau hy asya paripanthinau 
336 
60 The Unswerving Nature of Bhakti 
The senses come in contact with objects of perception and then relay the sense data to the mind. The mind immediately sorts the data either as desirable or undesirable. It then devises a strategy to obtain pleasurable objects or to avoid painful ones. The duality of the world and -- even more primarily - the mind's perception of such duality are without substantial existence, yet they appear as real to the cognitive faculty of the perceiver, just as dream objects (svapna) and daydreams (manoratha) appear real to the dreamer. 
This is the basis of duality. In the constitutional nature of the ātmā, or pure being, there is no such duality. In reality, every object is nothing other than a transformation of the potency of Bha- gavan and is thus meant exclusively for His service. Bhagavan is the subject of all experience and the enjoyer of all undertakings (GĪTĀ 5.29). Knowing this, one should discipline the mind to see beyond its dualistic determinations and engage only in pure bhakti. From this, fearlessness naturally ensues. Fearlessness is thus the symptom that duality has been transcended, since fear arises from the absorption in duality, and once duality is transcended, bhakti becomes unswerving. This is the solution proposed by Kavi. 
In the next anuccheda, Śrī Jīva discusses the third of the three characteristics of bhakti mentioned in Anuccheda 59, namely, its being constituted exclusively of direct devotional acts (tan- mātratvam). 
337 
