+++
title = "078"
+++
Kṛṣṇa Is Controlled Only by Bhakti 
७८ | यतः (भा० ११ ।१४।२० ) - 
[THE PATHS propagated by human beings of deluded discern- ment cannot yield the ultimate good bestowed by bhakti,] because [they lack the power to subdue Bhagavan], as expressed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa a few verses later: 
न साधयति मां योगो न साङ्ख्यं धर्म उद्धव । 
न स्वाध्यायस्तपस्त्यागो यथा भक्तिर्ममोर्जिता ॥ १२९ ॥ 
O Uddhava, neither the practice of yoga, nor sankhya, nor atten- tion to prescribed religious duties (dharma), nor the study of the Vedas, nor penance, nor renunciation can subdue Me as does all-powerful devotion rendered unto Me. (SB 11.14.20)1 
न साधयति न वशीकरोति । तपो ज्ञानम् । त्यागः सन्न्यासः || 
The verb na sadhayati, "does not subdue [Me]," means, "does not bring [Me] under their control (na vasikaroti)." Tapah, "penance," refers to the cultivation of knowledge (jñāna), and tyagaḥ, "renunciation," to the formal acceptance of the renounced order (sannyāsa). 
1 
na sadhayati mam yogo na sarkhyam dharma uddhava na svadhyāyas tapas tyago yatha bhaktir mamorjitā 
409 
Commentary 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
IN THIS verse, Śrī Krsna discloses the true reason for bhakti's supremacy. There is nothing more pleasing and attractive to Him than bhakti. Other paths are also capable of bestowing their respective results if they are somehow combined with bhakti, but not independently. This is clearly stated in the prayers of Brahma (SB 10.14.4), cited earlier. Bhakti is Kṛṣṇa's very heart- mad-atmakaḥ (SB 11.14.3), whereas sankhya, yoga, and jñāna are not directly related to Bhagavan. 
If someone undertakes the practice of yoga in the form of yama, niyama, āsana, and prāṇāyāma, what has that got to do with Kṛṣṇa personally? If your neighbor regularly works out at the gym, is that act directly pleasing to you, or even in any way related to you? The neighbor's actions are intended only for his own benefit. If at all such actions are beneficial to others, they can be so only indirectly. If, however, the same neighbor greets you and offers you a gift or extends you some kindness, then his action is directly pleasing, and you also reciprocate by greeting and offering him a gift in return. 
The principle being discussed here concerns "relationship" (sambandha), which forms the very essence of personal or con- scious being. In this regard, Bhagavan is the Supreme Person and hence the very source of both personhood and relationship. Accordingly, He reciprocates with human beings in direct corre- spondence with their affective disposition. If a human being has no interest in Bhagavan and is concerned only with his or her own empowerment or liberation, as is the case with the majority of those who are engaged in paths other than bhakti, then Bhaga- vän does not intervene in his or her life. He extends such indi- viduals the liberty to act as per their nature and intent. If, how- ever, a person becomes interested in Him, then He also recipro- cates accordingly with affectionate regard. In such appropriately correspondent dealings, Bhagavan is shown to be free from bias. 
The modifier urjitā, "all-powerful," qualifying bhakti, signifies that the intensity of bhakti's power is due to its exclusivity or one- pointedness, being undiluted by karma, jñāna, and so on. This is the 
410 
78 Krsna Is Controlled Only by Bhakti 
gist of Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti's gloss on the word urjitā. Such potent bhakti brings Bhagavan under the devotee's control. The per- fected stage of bhakti is prema, or divine love. Love is all-powerful and one-pointedly directed toward its object. This is the signifi- cance of the word urjitā. In the next verse, Kṛṣṇa asserts that any process devoid of bhakti cannot purify its practitioner. 
411
