+++
title = "103"
+++
Bhakti Contrasted with Yoga 
१०३ | तथा ( भा० १।६।३६ ) - 
IN THE same vein, Śrī Nārada instructed Śrī Vyāsa: 
यमादिभिर्योगपथैः कामलोभहतो मुहुः । 
मुकुन्दसेवया यद्वत् तथाद्धात्मा न शाम्यति ।। १९८ ।। 
The mind, which is repeatedly overwhelmed by lust and greed, is not as directly established in tranquility by the path of yoga, beginning with the practice of moral restraint (yama), as it is by the sacred service of Bhagavan Mukunda, "the very embodiment of liberation." (SB 1.6.36)1 
ततः सुतरामेव " न साधयति मां योगः " ( भा० ११ । १४ ।२०) इत्यादिकमिति भावः ॥ श्रीना- रदो श्रीव्यासम् ॥ 
1 
Consequently, the following assertion is all the more self- evident: 
2 
O Uddhava, neither the practice of yoga, nor Sankhya, nor atten- tion to prescribed religious duties (dharma), nor the study of the Vedas, nor penance, nor renunciation can subdue Me as does all-powerful devotion rendered unto Me. (SB 11.14.20)2 
yamadibhir yoga-pathaiḥ kama-lobha-hato muhuḥ mukunda-sevaya yad vat tathaddhātmā na samyati 
na sadhayati mam yogo na sankhyam dharma uddhava na svadhyayas tapas tyago yatha bhaktir mamorjitā 
531Commentary 
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
THE mind (manas) is a product of prakṛti, which is constituted of the three gunas. The three gunas exist and interact in a state of invariable entanglement. It is not possible to separate any one of them from the other two, as they are integrally present in every- thing material. It is only their ratios that are subject to variation. Some things contain a higher preponderance of sattva, others of rajas, and yet others of tamas. Since the mind is also a product of these three gunas, it can never be permanently established in sattva alone, free from any influence of rajas and tamas, by any method that is itself at best a product of sattva-guna. Consequently, the attempt to control the mind by the practice of yoga, which is born of sattva-guna, can be successful only up to a certain point. When rajas exerts its influence, the mind will again be thrown out of the equilibrated state. 
Bhakti, however, being the intrinsic potency of Bhagavan, is completely beyond the gunas. By engagement in bhakti, a devotee's mind becomes imbued with this potency and functions directly under its influence. When this occurs, the mind is established in the state of unwavering tranquility, known as sama. Narada confirms to Vyasa that the mind is "directly tranquilized” (addhā śāmyati) by sevā to Śrī Mukunda, "the very embodiment of liber- ation." As a consequence of this transmutation of its fundamental nature, the mind is no longer subject to the fluctuations of the mate- rial gunas, and hence there is no possibility of its straying away from Bhagavan. No sense object born of the gunas has the power to pull away the "nirguna-essentialized" (i.e., nirguna-ātmaka) mind of a devotee. 
In Narada's statement (SB 1.6.36), the sense of saying that "the mind is not 'as' directly established in tranquility by the path of yoga" is that if one combines yoga with bhakti, then the mind can be partially equilibrated due to the slight infusion of the nirguna intrinsic potency. Even this partial tranquilization, however, is not accomplished as effectively as is the case when one engages in pure nirguna devotion. If, on the other hand, one practices yoga devoid of 
532 
103 Bhakti Contrasted with Yoga 
bhakti, then because the mind remains under the influence of the guņas, it can never transcend its own nature and become directly established in "unwavering peace" (sama). 
For this reason, even Patanjali in his Yoga-sutras has included "surrender to God" (isvara-pranidhana) in all three types of yoga outlined by him. In the first chapter, he describes rāja-yoga and advocates isvara-praṇidhāna in sutra 1.23. In the second chapter, he discusses kriya-yoga (2.1) and aṣṭārga-yoga (2.29). Surrender to God is compulsory for the latter two disciplines. Within the context of the Yoga-sutras, bhakti in the form of isvara-praṇidhāna is taken as secondary to yoga, and it is understood as assisting in bringing forth the results of yoga. 
Having established bhakti as the abhidheya by showing the infe- rior status of karma and yoga, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī next applies the same strategy of disaffirmative inference (vyatireka) in regard to the path of jñāna. 
533 
