+++
title = "107"
+++
Kṛṣṇa Alone Is Worthy To Be Taken Shelter Of 
१०७ । तथा (भा० १० ।४८।२६ ) - 
AKRŪRA prayed to Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a similar fashion [i.e., similar to the devas' prayer in sB 6.9.22, cited in the last anuccheda]: 
कः पण्डितस्त्वदपरं शरणं समीयाद् भक्तप्रियादृतगिरः सुहृदः कृतज्ञात् । सर्वान् ददाति सुहृदो भजतोऽभिकामानात्मनमप्युपचयापचयौ न यस्य ॥ 
२६७ ॥ 
What person of awakened discernment would approach any- one for shelter other than You, who are filled with love for Your devotees, whose words are truthful, who are a kindhearted friend, and grateful? [For] not only do You fulfill all the aspira- tions of those who worship You and who are affectionate toward You, but You also award them even Your own Self. Yet in doing so, there is no increase or diminution for You. (SB 10.48.26 ) 1 
सुहृदो हितकारिस्वभावात् तत्रापि कृतज्ञादुपकाराभासेऽपि बहुमन्वानाद् यो भजतो भजमानाय सर्वान् कामानभीष्टानभि सर्वतोभावेन ददाति । तत्रापि सुहृदः सुहृदे सप्रीतये त्वात्मानमपि ददाति । न च सर्वतोभावेन दाने तादृशेभ्यो बहुभ्यो दाने वा समावेशाभावः स्यादित्याह – उपचयेति ॥ अक्रूरः श्रीभगवन्तम् ॥ 

1 kah panditas tvad aparam saranam samiyād bhakta-priyād yta girah suhrdah krta-jnat sarvăn dadāti suhṛdo bhajato 'bhikaman ātmānam apy upacayāpacayau na yasya 
613 
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya 
[In the second line of the verse,] the word suhṛdaḥ, “a kind- hearted friend," [qualifying Bhagavan,] means "He whose nature is to be of benefit to others" (hita-kāri-svabhavaḥ). More- over, in the matter of being such a benefactor (tatrapi), He is "grateful," or "appreciatively aware of whatever is done" (kṛta- jñaḥ), meaning that He considers even a mere semblance of benevolence (upakāra-ābhāsa) as being of great significance. So, because He is both a kindhearted friend and grateful, He fully grants all the aspirations of those who worship Him (bhajataḥ). The prefix abhi expresses superiority or intensity; when applied to the verb dadāti, "He gives," it means that He grants all aspi- rations to the highest order of completion (sarvato-bhāvena). In this respect, He awards even His own Self to those in particular who are His friends (suhṛdah), meaning to those who are filled with love for Him (saprītaye). Yet, in granting all yearnings to the highest completion, or in bestowing them [simultaneously] upon innumerable such recipients, there is no absence (abhāva) of the totality of His intentness (samāveṣa) [to each and every devotee at one and the same moment]. This is the significance of the phrase, "Yet in doing so, there is no increase or diminution for You" (yasya upacayapacayau na). 
Commentary 
THIS verse was spoken by Akrūra when Krṣṇa visited his home. When Akrūra brought Krsna and Balarama to Mathura on Kamsa's order, he invited Them to visit his home. Krsna promised that He would come after killing Kamsa (SB 10.41.17). When He did so, Akrūra was overwhelmed with joy to see Kṛṣṇa and praised Him for keeping His promise. It is commonly observed that people occu- pying high-ranking positions in society are often unable to keep their word, because they have too many pressing matters to attend to. People with political power are especially notorious for break- ing their promises to the common people. But although Kṛṣṇa had many royal and familial responsibilities, He still kept His word. 
614 
107 Kṛṣṇa Alone Is Worthy To Be Taken Shelter Of 
The intention behind Akrura's statement is that Kṛṣṇa alone is worthy to be taken shelter of. In drawing this conclusion, Akrūra reasons from his own direct experience. Kṛṣṇa is truthful, a well- wishing friend without any expectation of return, and grateful. He fulfills the aspirations of His devotees beyond all imagination and even awards them His own Self. In the act of being simul- taneously present to innumerable devotees to grant their wishes and even offer Himself, He is not in the least diminished, because He is unlimited and intrinsically self-endowed with transrational 
power. 
In the third line of the cited verse, the word suhṛdah is used for a second time, here qualifying the devotee. Although the word is either an ablative or a genitive case singular declension, the gram- matical sense of both of these cases does not fit the context. The word suhṛdaḥ has already been used in the ablative case singular in the second line (referring to Śrī Kṛṣṇa), and it would be redun- dant here to refer to Him again. The word does not fit the sense of the genitive case either. Therefore, Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī takes it in the sense of the dative case, being a modifier of the indirect object of the verb. 
It is commonly observed that when a donor offers charity to someone, he has a sense of superiority and expects the recipient to be grateful to him. Kṛṣṇa, however, feels grateful to His devotee and acknowledges even the devotee's slightest act of devotion as a great favor done to Him. For this reason, Akrūra refers to Kṛṣṇa as kṛtajña, or grateful. He is so grateful that He extends His full attention to all of His devotees. This quality hints at His unlimited capacity to reciprocate with any number of devotees. 
In the next anuccheda, Śrī Jīva establishes bhakti as the abhi- dheya through disaffirmation (vyatireka), by the disregard expressed for those who are bereft of devotion. 
615 
Bhakti Established through Disregard 
for Nondevotion 
Anucchedas 108-110 
