+++
title = "1940 elephant puNDra"
+++

While deciding on Elephant, it has decided as follows in the last but third paragraph: 

“After all the elephant is one forms a part of the paraphernalia of the chief deity and in this temple the chief deity bears admittedly a Vadagalai namam and it has been found that should so wear. It is usual in any temple that the mark on the paraphernalia of any deity should be the same as the marks of the chief deity. Further this elephant is a gift by His Highness of Maharaja of Travancore with a condition that the elephant that the elephant should be painted with a Vadagalai namam Vide XXIV-the letter of the Chief Secretary. Therefore the donor’s wishes that it should be painted only with a Vadagalai namam should be complied with and there is no reason for not doing so. By the elephant being adorned with a Vadagalai namam the fundamental character of the institution or the nature of worship there is not altered. It has been the usage for the temple elephant to bear the Vadagalai namam from at least 1834 or 1893 and donor’s wish is that it should be painted with Vadagalai namam on the face. To order a Thengalai namam for the elephant would be introducing really an innovation. We therefore, direct the elephant now presented by His Highness the Maharaja of Travancore should be painted with a Vadagalai namam. The elephant will have a Vadagalai mark. The aggrieved Thenkalai community filed O.S.7 of 1945 before the District Judge, Chingleput challenging this order. The suit was dismissed on merits. Thereupon the Thenkalai Community filed a Appeal before the High Court of Madras in Appeal against Order No.111 of 1948. They withdrew the same “Adocate for Appellant (Thenklai) representing that the matter had been settled out of court and requesting for permission to withdraw the appeal and also representing that the appellants will not proceed with the suit it is ORDERED that the appeal be hereby is dismissed as withdrawn and it is further ordered that there be no costs to this appeal.”
