+++
title = "3 iii \\) Conclusions"

+++

Of the scriptural sources available to me which do not appear to have been authored by sectarian Pāñcarātrikas who called themselves ‘Ekāyana’, the JS, the ViṣṇuS, the ParS and the LT contain the most uses of the terms *ekānta * and *ekāntin*. In the ParS 

and the LT, the designation *ekāntin* is employed within mythical narratives to name the ideal devotees. In this sense, their use of the term is continuous with that found in the *Nārāyaṇīya*. Contrarily, the JS and the ViṣṇuS use the term to designate one particular class of Vaiṣṇava among others. The sections of the JS which describe Ekāntins are very likely South Indian in origin, as is the ViṣṇuS. The fact that they do not use the word *ekāntin*/ *ekāntika* as a general term of commendation, but as a label for a specific religious identity may indicate that the relevant portions of these texts are later than the ParS and the LT, or that they were authored within a different South Indian context to those works. Both the JS and the ViṣṇuS present the Ekāntins or Ekāntikas as renunciants, and both hint that they do not belong to the twice-born social classes. Unfortunately, their descriptions are very brief, and they do not contain enough information to enable us to affirm that they are describing the Pāñcarātrikas who call themselves Ekāyanas or Āgamasiddhāntins. 

226 

The latter Pāñcarātrikas appropriated the name *ekāntin*, and very possibly the ideal of absolute monotheism alongside it. Numerous sections of the PauṣS were authored by Ekāyanas. The PauṣS clearly lacks homogeneity, and there are several clues, some of which I have pointed to in Chapter Five, that significant sections of it were composed in South India. Among these I would provisionally include the more explicitly “sectarian” portions of the text, which can be best explained in relation to the competition among distinct Pāñcarātra traditions for the control of public temples in South India. The other textual sources which most clearly indicate the existence of this religiously \(and, inevitably, commercially\) competitive environment, such as the PādS and the PārS, are demonstrably South Indian. Moreover, at least some of the passages in the PauṣS which suggest more cooperative relations between distinct Pāñcarātra traditions, including those which I have addressed above, appear to be even later additions to the text. This is evidently the case with the quoted passage authorising mixed worship “for those who are qualified”, and I propose also that the passages which promise a better rebirth to those who make generous donations to the temple \(i.e. PauṣS 30.174c-184b, and 41.143-155\) can be added to this later layer. 

This means that we can provisionally distinguish at least three textual layers in the PauṣS: i.\) the early layer/s wherein *sakāma* and *niṣkāma* worshippers are addressed as apparent equals, as they are in the SS; ii.\) the explicitly sectarian portions wherein, for example, mixed worshippers are denounced as “devotees in appearance only”, and worship motivated by personal desires is either condemned or prohibited; iii.\) the later layer containing passages, addressed in this chapter, which indicate a change in attitude regarding mixed worship. A possible fourth layer is represented by the PauṣS’s 42nd chapter on the rites for installing a divine image in the temple \( *pratiṣṭhā*\), as discussed in Chapter Five. Here, Ekāyanas are shown to cooperate with Pāñcarātrika Brahmins who have expertise in the Vedas. Due to the similarity between the passages in this chapter and those found in the final two chapters of the SS, which appear to have been appended to that work, I consider it very likely that this chapter of the PauṣS is also an interpolation. Like SS 24-25, however, its composition must have preceded that of the PārS, which incorporates many of its verses. It is not clear to me whether the layer represented by PauṣS 42 is 227 

coeval with layer three distinguished above, or whether it might be added between layers one and two. 

The apparent Ekāyana appropriation of the religious identity of the Ekāntins of the *Nārāyaṇīya*, with their absolute monotheism, for example, and their absolute renunciation of personal desires, was no doubt limited by a religious environment that was dominated by the priestly performance of temple rituals for fee-paying clients. The passages in the PauṣS which promise rebirth as an Ekāntin to those who make donations to the temple show that, despite their professed ideals, Ekāyanas were active in advertising their ritual expertise to prospective patrons. The verses concerning the endowment of food \(i.e. PauṣS 41.143-155\) appear to be addressed specifically to royal patrons, since their description of a superior rebirth includes typically Kṣatriya qualities such as valour or might \( *śaurya*\), constancy or command \( *dhṛti*\), and power \( *utsāha*\), as well as a reference to “enemies” \( *dviṣatām*\). In this sort of competitive environment, and indeed in an increasingly urbanised society, there would have been little place for the ideals of the “original” Ekāntins. The acceptance of worshippers who desire fruits \( *phalārthin*\) presumably became both a political and an economic necessity. 

228 