+++
title = "131"
+++
Bhakti Is the Source of Fulfillment
for All Beings
1
१३१ | सर्वप्रीणनहेतुत्वमुक्तम् "यथा तरोर्मूलनिषेचनेन” ( भा० ४ | ३१ । १४) इत्यादिना ।
BHAKTI is the source of fulfillment for all beings, as expressed in the following verse:
Just as by pouring water on the root of a tree, its trunk, branches, and twigs become nourished, and just as by supplying food to the vital life current (prāna), the senses gain strength, so too by worshiping Bhagavan Acyuta [Kṛṣṇa], the worship of all entities is effected. (SB 4.31.14)1
तथाह (भा० ४।९।४६-४७ ) -
Accordingly, Śrī Maitreya informed Vidura:
सुरुचिस्तं समुत्थाप्य पादावनतमर्भकम् ।
परिष्वज्याह जीवेति बाष्पगद्गदया गिरा ॥ ३५६ ॥ यस्य प्रसन्नो भगवान् गुणैर्मैत्र्यादिभिर्हरिः ।
तस्मै नमन्ति भूतानि निम्नमाप इव स्वयम् ॥ ३५७ ॥
Suruci, the stepmother of Dhruva, lifting up the boy who had prostrated himself at her feet, embraced him and with a falter- ing voice, choked with tears, blessed him with the words, "May you live long." Just as the water of a river flows downward of its
yatha taror mula-nisecanena trpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopasākḥāḥ pranopahārac ca yathendriyanam tathaiva sarvarhanam acyutejyā
769
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
own accord, all living beings naturally extend regard to a per- son by whose benevolence and other qualities Bhagavan Hari is pleased. (SB 4.9.46-47)2
सुरुचिर्निजविद्वेषिणी मातुः स्वपत्न्यपि तं भगवदाराधनत आगतं श्रीध्रुवम् । यथा पाद्मे-
Although Suruci had been envious of Dhruva, being the co- wife of his mother, she blessed Dhruva in this manner after he returned from worshiping Bhagavan in the forest. As is said in the Padma Purāna:
येनार्चितो हरिस्तेन तर्पितानि जगन्त्यपि ।
रज्यन्ति जन्तवस्तत्र जङ्गमाः स्थावरा अपि ॥ ३५८ ॥
श्रीमैत्रेयः ॥
One who has worshiped Bhagavan Hari has satisfied the whole world. All mobile and even immobile living beings are deeply moved by such a person. (Padma Purāna)3
Commentary
DEVOTEES are free from envy, jealousy, and the tendency to exploit others. Being friendly and compassionate toward all, they have no reason to hate anyone. In fact, hatred is not possible for gen- uine devotees, because they perceive the whole creation and all liv- ing beings as manifestations of their worshipful Bhagavan. Since
2 surucis tam samutthäpya pādāvanatam arbhakam
parişvajyäha jiveti bäspa-gadgadaya giră
yasya prasanno bhagavan gunair maitry-adibhir harih
tasmai namanti bhutani nimnam apa iva svayam
J
yenārcito haris tena tarpitani jaganty api
rajyanti jantavas tatra jangamaḥ sthāvarā api
770
131 Bhakti Is the Source of Fulfillment for All Beings
devotees love Bhagavan, they naturally also love His creation. Addi- tionally, because bhakti fills the devotees' hearts with beauty, non- enviousness, and loving kindness, other living beings can also feel it. Thus, they feel happy in the presence of such devotees.
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi here refers to the story of the young prince, Dhruva. His father, Uttānapāda, who was the ruler of the earth, had two wives, Suruci and Sunīti, the latter being Dhruva's mother. The king favored Suruci over Sunīti, which made Suruci exceed- ingly proud and insolent. One day, the young Dhruva was trying to climb up onto the lap of his father in the presence of Queen Suruci. The queen rebuked the boy and told him that he was not fortunate enough to sit in the king's lap, a place reserved only for her son. The boy felt bitterly insulted and went crying to his mother. Sunīti could not help but know that her husband was biased toward her co-wife. She assured her son that only Bhagavan could help him. On hearing this, Dhruva asked where he could find Bhagavan. The mother innocently replied that He could be found in the forest. The child took his mother's words to heart and at night snuck away to the forest.
On the way, Dhruva met sage Narada, who tried to dissuade him, but the boy was firm in his determination. Narada then initiated him into the twelve-syllable mantra. Dhruva meditated assiduously through means of the mantra, and within six months, Bhagavan appeared before him to bless him. After this, Dhruva returned to the kingdom, being radically transformed by his expe- rience. When he met his stepmother, he immediately bowed down to her, since his heart was now pure and hence devoid of all hatred. The verses cited here describe Suruci's response to Dhruva.
A doubt may be raised in this regard. It is seen that many devo- tees in the past as well as at present are harassed by nondevotees. So, why is it said that everyone is pleased with bhakti or with a devotee? The answer is that those who are not excessively influ- enced by envy and malice feel happiness in a devotee's presence, but those who are particularly envious by nature feel threatened by them. Most people in this world experience anxiety in the face of the unknown. When they encounter a person belonging to a
771I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
different culture or religion, or holding different beliefs, they can often feel threatened. In the case of nondevotees, this is due only to deep-seated ignorance, because a devotee is harmless.
772
