+++
title = "133"
+++
Karma Is Saguņa
१३३ । अथ साक्षाद् भक्तेर्निर्गुणत्वं वक्तुं भगवदर्पितकर्मारभ्य सर्वेषां कर्मणां तावत् सगुणत्वमाहैकेन (भा० ११।२५।२३ ) -
Now, to establish that direct (sākṣāt) bhakti is nirguna, or beyond the qualitative constituents of primordial nature, Bha- gavän first points out with a single verse that all karma, includ- ing that which is offered to Bhagavan, is saguna, or under the jurisdiction of the material gunas:
मदर्पणं निष्फलं वा सात्त्विकं निजकर्म तत् ।
राजसं फलसङ्कल्पं हिंसाप्रायादि तामसम् ॥ ३६१ ॥
The execution of one's own prescribed action (nija-karma), either offered to Me (mad-arpanam) or without any desire for the fruit (nisphalam) is of the qualitative nature of sattva-guna (sättvika). Action that is motivated by a desire for the fruit (phala-sankalpam) is of the qualitative nature of rajas (rāja- sika), and action predominated by violence, and so on, is of the nature of tamas (tāmasika). (SB 11.25.23)1
मयि अर्पणं यस्य मदर्पितमित्यर्थः । निष्फलं निष्कामम् । फलं सङ्कल्प्यते यस्मिन् तत् । आदिशब्दाद् दम्भमात्सर्यादिभिः कृतम् ॥
The compound mad-arpanam means "action offered to Me." The word nisphalam means "action performed without any desire
mad-arpanam nisphalam va sättvikam nija-karma tat
rajasaṁ phala-sankalpam himsa-prāyādi tamasam
779
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
for the fruit" (niskāmam). The compound phala-sankalpam means "action motivated by a desire for the fruit." The word ādi, "and so on" [in himsā-prāyādi, “action predominated by violence, and so on"], includes action predominated by other tāmasika attitudes, such as pride (dambha) and envy (mātsarya).
Commentary
THIS verse (SB 11.25.23) is introduced here by Śrī Jiva as a lead- in to the discussion of sākṣāt-bhakti, which is nirguna, or beyond the qualitative constituents of primordial nature. Sākṣāt-bhakti is also known as svarupa-siddha-bhakti, "constitutional devotion," or "devotion that is inherently of the essence of the intrinsic potency." In chapter 25 of the Eleventh Canto, there is a section of verses (23-29) that is similar to those found in Bhagavad Gita, chapters 14, 17, and 18. In all of these passages, there are detailed descriptions of the material gunas and their influences on knowledge, action, and the performer. In particular, the following three verses from Chapter 18 describe action influenced by the three gunas:
That action which is enjoined by scripture, which is performed without attachment and free from attraction or repulsion, by a person not yearning for its fruit, is called sättvika. That action, however, which is performed with great effort by a person hanker- ing for enjoyment or out of egotism, is called räjasika. That action which is undertaken out of delusion, without considering its con- sequences, the detriment it may bring, the violence it may cause to oneself or to others, and whether one has the requisite power to perform it, is called tamasika. (GĪTĀ 18.23-25)2
The fundamental difference between the Gitā passages that treat the subject of the gunas and the corresponding verses in the
2
niyatam sanga-rahitam araga-dveşatah krtam
aphala-prepsunā karma yat tat sättvikam ucyate
yat tu kämepsunā karma sāhankāreņa vā punaḥ kriyate bahulayasam tad rājasam udahṛtam anubandham kṣayam himsam anapeksya ca paurusam mohad ārabhyate karma yat tat tāmasam ucyate
780
133 Karma Is Saguna
Bhāgavata is that the latter includes a description of the nirguna state as it applies to knowledge, action, and the performer. In the radical nondualism (kevala-advaita) of Sankara Vedanta, the term nirguna is taken to mean the absolute denial of all quality, form, action, and agency. In contrast, however, the integral nondualism (bheda-abheda) of the Bhāgavata postulates that since both Bha- gavan and the individual self (ātmā) are self-endowed with form, attributes, and action, even in the liberated transcendental state, it is necessary to give an indication of how this can be so within the context of nirguna existence. Jīva Gosvāmi analyzes this section of the Bhāgavata in this and the following anucchedas (133-137).
From a cursory glance, it appears that varṇāśrama duties, even if offered to Bhagavan, are enacted from the point of view of bod- ily and, hence, sagunika identification; therefore, they can only be sättvika at best. According to the verse, there are two degrees of sättvika action in decreasing order of importance. The high- est entails offering one's own varṇāśrama-dharma (nija-karma) to Kṛṣṇa (mad-arpanam), and the other is simply to undertake the same action without desire for the fruit (nisphalam). This is how the verse reads if the indeclinable va is taken in its normal sense as "or," implying an alternative.
Here, however, it would be more philosophically correct to take the word va to mean "and." The reason for this is that according to Śrī Narada, any action that is not offered to Bhaga- vān, even if undertaken without any personal motive (akāraṇam, i.e., akāmyam), will not bear a positive result - na carpitaṁ karma yad apy
akāraṇam (SB 1.5.12). If the word va (in SB 11.25.23) is taken in its literal sense as "or," then nişphalam (i.e., karma performed without any desire for the fruit) would have to be understood as a separate instance of sättvika action, independent of the offering of such works to Bhagavan. This, however, would contradict Narada's statement that even such unmotivated karma cannot produce a sättvika result.
From this perspective, the verse is understood to mean that if one's prescribed duty (nija-karma) is offered to Kṛṣṇa (mad- arpanam) and is performed without any desire for the fruit
7811 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya

(nisphalam) — i.e., only for purification of the heart (sattva-śuddhi- artham) then it is defined as sättvika action. This is a refine- ment of the definition of sättvika-karma given in the Gītā verse cited above (18.23). The Gita's definition can be reconciled with that given here by the understanding that adherence to one's pre- scribed duties without any desire for material benefit is to follow the injunction of the Veda, which is the word of Bhagavan. In this sense, such unmotivated action amounts to a type of indirect offering to Bhagavan by way of reverence for and adherence to His word.
782
