+++
title = "137"
+++
Faith in the Service of Bhagavan Is Nirguna
१३७ | तदेवं क्रियामात्रस्य तादृशत्वमुक्त्वा तत्प्रवृत्तिहेतुभूतायाः श्रद्धाया अप्याह (भा०
ારવાર)-
IN THIS manner, after stating that all action related to Him is nirguṇa, Bhagavan declares that even the faith that impels one to such action is nirguna:
सात्त्विक्याध्यात्मिकी श्रद्धा कर्मश्रद्धा तु राजसी । तामस्यधर्मे या श्रद्धा मत्सेवायां तु निर्गुणा ॥ ३७५ ॥
Faith directed to the Self is sättvika, faith in worldly action is rajasika, faith in irreligious deeds is tāmasika, whereas faith in My service is nirguna. (SB 11.25.27)1
अधर्मोऽपरधर्मः । अन्यत् पूर्ववत् ॥ श्रीभगवान् ॥
The word adharma, "irreligious deeds," here means apara- dharma, "duties that are prescribed for others." The rest of the verse should be interpreted in accordance with the previous
1
statements.
2
sättviky ādhyātmiki śraddha karma-śraddhā tu rājasī
tamasy adharme ya śraddha mat-sevayam tu nirguna
The word apara can mean either "other" (anya) or "inferior, low, or vile" (nikrsta). If adharma is taken as apara-dharma in the former sense, the phrase adharme ya śraddha would mean "faith in the duties that are prescribed for others." Taken in the latter sense, the phrase would mean "faith in low or vile action." On the same point, Śrīdhara Svami comments as follows: "That faith which considers adharma as dharma is tāmasika" (adharme dharma iti ya sraddhā sā tamasi).
809
Commentary
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
VARIOUS DESIRES appear in the mind based upon our residual pre- dispositions (vāsanās) from our past lives and new impressions (saṁskāras) formed in this life. Since, however, desires are of dif- ferent degrees of intensity, we do not act on all desires. Our deci- sions are based on our faith. Thus, faith is the driving force behind all our actions. Faith is essentially that which one takes to be real. It is the belief that one has in some particular person, process, sys- tem, or lifestyle, with the conviction that by adherence to any of the latter, one will be happy or one's desires will be fulfilled. This belief may be based on one's upbringing, acquired knowledge, or derived from one's social or cultural group. Everybody has faith in something. Nobody is devoid of faith, as Kṛṣṇa affirms in the Gītā:
O descendant of Bharata, everyone's faith is according to their indi- vidual psychological make-up. The empirical self is in fact a by- product of faith. Therefore, whatever faith a person demonstrates is exactly the faith with which he is endowed. (GĪTA 17.3)3
The word adharma normally refers to a forbidden or sinful act. In commenting on this word, Śrī Jīva says that even to have faith in another person's duty (apara-dharma) while abandoning one's own is tāmasika, because it is a product of ignorance (tamas). In the Gītā (3.35), Kṛṣṇa says that adharma in the form of adherence to the dharma of another (para-dharma) is perilous (bhayavaha).
3
810
sattvānurupā sarvasya śraddha bhavati bharata śraddha-mayo'yam puruso yo yac-craddhaḥ sa eva saḥ
