+++
title = "152"
+++
Bhakti-ābhāsa Also Destroys Sins
१५२ । तथा भक्त्याभासस्यापि सर्वपापक्षयपूर्वक श्रीविष्णुपदप्रापकत्वं यथा बृहन्नारदीये कोकिलामालिनोर्मदिरोन्मत्तयोर्धृतकुचीरखण्डदण्डयोर्जीर्णभगवन्मन्दिरे नृत्यतोर्ध्वजा- रोपणफलप्राप्त्या तादृशत्वं जातम् ।
EVEN BHAKTI-ABHASA, a mere semblance of devotion, destroys all sins and causes one to attain the abode of Bhagavan Viṣṇu. This is illustrated in two stories from the Brhan-naradiya Purāna. The first concerns a couple named Mälini and Kokila [who lived in an abandoned temple ]. Once, on becoming intox- icated while drinking wine, they took a pole, tied a strip of worn out cloth to it, and danced in that dilapidated old temple of Bhagavan. This action was viewed as if they had conducted the auspicious ceremony of installing a flag on a temple, and as a result, they attained the abode of Bhagavan.
तथा व्याधहतस्य पक्षिणः कुक्कुरमुखगतस्य तत्पलायनवृत्त्या भगवन्मन्दिरपरिक्रमणफ- लप्राप्त्या तादृशत्वप्राप्तिरिति ।
The second story tells of a bird that was shot by a hunter. Before the hunter could retrieve the bird, a dog snatched it in its mouth and ran off with it, inadvertently treading a path around a tem- ple. By this, the bird received the benefit of circumambulating
temple of Bhagavan and attained His abode.
क्वचित् तत्र महाभक्तिप्राप्तिश्च यथा बृहन्नारसिंहपुराणे श्रीप्रह्लादस्य । तस्य प्राग्जन्मनि
वेश्यया सह विवादेन श्रीनृसिंहचतुर्दश्यां दैवादुपवासः सम्पन्नो जागरणं चेति ।
886
152 Bhakti-abhasa Also Destroys Sins
Sometimes by a semblance of devotion, a person may even be blessed with supreme devotion (mahā-bhakti) to Bhagavan. An instance of this is related in the Bṛhan-narasimha Purāņa in regard to the great devotee Śrī Prahlada. In his previous life, he was an ordinary man who had a relationship with a prostitute. One day, he had a terrible fight with her and became so upset that he was unable to eat or sleep the whole day and night. By coincidence, that day was Nrsimha Caturdaśī. Thus, by provi- dence, he received the benefit of observing this holy day [and became Prahlada in his next life, a great devotee of Bhagavan Nrsimha].
तथा चाह (भा० ३।९।१५) -
The fact that a semblance of devotion destroys sins and leads one to the supreme abode can also be concluded from Brahma's statement to Śri Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu:
यस्यावतारगुणकर्मविडम्बनानि नामानि येऽसुविगमे विवशा गृणन्ति । तेऽनैकजन्मशमलं सहसैव हित्वा संयान्त्यपावृतामृतं तमजं प्रपद्ये ॥ ४१९ ||
Those who somehow utter Your names, which are representa- tive of Your avatāric descents, qualities, and divine acts, doing so even out of a sense of helplessness at the moment of death, are immediately freed from the sins accumulated over many lives and attain the Absolute Truth, which is beyond all covering. I take shelter of You, the Unborn Absolute. (SB 3.9.15)1
असुविगमेऽपीति तदानीन्तनमात्रत्वमशुद्धवर्णत्वं च व्यञ्जितम् । विवशा इति तदिच्छां विनापि केनचित् कारणान्तरेणापीत्यर्थः । “वश कान्तौ ” इत्यमरः ।
The words asu-vigame api, "even at the moment of death," imply that the people being referred to are those who utter the name only at that time. It also implies a physical and mental state in which it would be impossible to pronounce Bhagavān's name
1
yasyavatara-guna-karma-vidambanani
nāmāni ye'su-vigame vivasa grnanti
te'naika-janma-samalam sahasaiva hitvā samyanty apavṛtāmṛtam tam ajam prapadye
887
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
properly. The word vivaśaḥ, "helplessly," means that their utter- ance of the name occurs even without their conscious intent or even due to some other reason [not as an intentional act of devotion]. This is corroborated by the Amarakośa dictionary, in which the word vasa is defined as "will" (kānti) [hence, vi-vasa means, “absence of will or intention"].
तादृशशक्तित्वे हेतुमाह-अवतारेति । अवतारादिसदृशानि तत्तत्तुल्यशक्तीनीत्यर्थः । तत्रावतारविडम्बनानि नृसिंहेत्यादीनि गुणविडम्बनानि भक्तवत्सलेत्यादीनि कर्मविड- म्बनानि गोवर्धनधरेत्यादीनि च ॥ ब्रह्मा श्रीगर्भोदकशायिनम् ॥
The reason why the names of Bhagavan are endowed with so much power is expressed by the words avatara-guṇa-karma- vidambanāni, meaning that Bhagavan's names are representa- tive of His avataric descents, qualities, and divine acts. This means that these names are identical to the avatāras them- selves (avatarādi-sadṛśāni), and thus they are endowed with the same respective potencies (tat-tat-tulya-śaktini). In this regard, Nrsimha is an example of a name that is representative of one of Bhagavan's avataric descents (avatara-viḍambanāni). Bhakta-vatsala, "He who is affectionate toward His devotees," is an example of a name that is representative of Bhagavan's qual- ities (guna-viḍambanāni). And Govardhana-dhara, "the lifter of Govardhana Hill," is an example of a name that is representative of Bhagavan's divine acts (karma-viḍambanāni).
Commentary
IN THE last anuccheda, Śrī Jiva demonstrated that bhakti can deliver even a person who is simply related to a devotee. Now in this anuccheda, he makes the point that not to speak of direct devo- tion, even an act that is a mere semblance (abhāsa) of bhakti has the power to deliver one from sins and even lead to genuine devo- tion. The power that lies in a semblance of bhakti can be understood from the example of a plastic snake. If an artificial snake lying on the ground is misperceived as real, it can induce genuine fear. Although the plastic snake poses no factual threat, it has the power
888
152 Bhakti-abhasa Also Destroys Sins
to incite fear because it resembles a real snake. Accordingly, a sem- blance of bhakti is endowed with similar power to free a person from sins and ward off the Yamadūtas.
There are many examples of bhakti-abhasa cited throughout the scriptures - the most famous being that of Ajamila, found in the Sixth Canto of Srimad Bhāgavata. At the time of death, he called for his young son out of fear, when he saw the Yamadūtas coming for him. His son's name happened to be Nārāyaṇa, a name of Bhagavan. Ajamila was neither thinking of Bhagavan nor calling Him, yet on hearing the name of their master, the servants of Nārāyaṇa came to protect Ajamila from the agents of Yama.
In India, people sometimes take advantage of a famous person by citing his name and claiming that they are related to him, when in reality they have no such relation. The pretense of such a rela- tion, however, is often effective in accomplishing their purpose. Similarly, there is a class of people in India called bahu-rūpīya, who dress up in many different uniforms, such as that of a policeman, and attempt to deceive people so as to extort some money from them. These ordinary life examples, though involving unlawful applications of the principle, nonetheless demonstrate the power of similitude. Even the power to misrepresent depends upon the truth quotient of that which the misrepresentation purports to be. Following this principle, the semblance of Bhagavan's name func- tions only on the basis of the power of bhakti itself. Bhakti belong- ing to the intrinsic potency (svarupa-sakti) invests its power into that which it graciously regards to be its own semblance, and this alone renders the semblance effective.
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi refers to two stories from the Narada Purāṇa to illustrate the power of bhakti-abhāsa. The first is found in the twentieth chapter of the Purva-khanda, wherein the sage Sanaka Kumāra relates to Narada the glories of mounting a flag atop a tem- ple of Visņu. He tells the story of a great king named Sumati, who lived during Satyayuga. He was exceedingly pious and devoted to Bhagavan. His queen, Satyamati, was equally religious and a great devotee. The king used to offer a magnificent flag to the temple on every twelfth day (Dvadasi) of the lunar month. The queen, for her
889
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
part, was very fond of dancing in front of the deity of Visnu in the temple. Once, the sage Vibhāṇḍaka, having heard the glories of the king, came to visit him along with his disciples. The king received him with great honor.
During the course of their conversation, the sage submitted the following inquiry: "O King, I am very pleased with your reception of me and your conduct. I am curious about a certain matter, which you may respond to if you feel so inclined. There are numerous types of devotional service. Why in particular are you so fond of offering a flag in the temple, and your queen, of dancing for the pleasure of the deity?"
Both the king and queen were able to remember their previous lives. The king was thus able to pinpoint the reason for their respec- tive devotional predilections. He replied: "In my past life, I was a śūdra, by the name of Malini. I was irreligious and of ill-conduct, given to stealing, telling lies, addicted to drinking and enjoying the company of prostitutes. I was abandoned by my family members because of my misconduct. Not finding any shelter, I went and took up residence in a forest. While wandering there, I discovered an old temple of Vişņu and made my home in it. I used to maintain myself by hunting.
"One day, a woman named Avakokila, belonging to the Niṣāda tribe, happened to come there. She was abandoned by her family and was wandering in the wilderness. She was emaciated due to severe malnutrition. I felt compassion for her and gave her food to eat. We began living together as husband and wife. One night, we got drunk and began dancing, while whirling our clothes in the air like a flag.
"When the time for our death arrived, the Yamadūtas came to arrest us for our sins. Just then, however, the Viṣṇudūtas arrived and forbade them from touching us. An argument ensued between them regarding the question of our culpability, but the Viṣṇudu- tas prevailed. They testified, 'At the end of their lives, this woman danced in the temple and the man put up a flag. By virtue of these devotional acts, they have become free of all sins.' Thus, we were saved from the Yamadūtas, and now in this life, we have become
890
152 Bhakti-abhasa Also Destroys Sins
king and queen. Accordingly, we are particularly drawn to the ser- vices of raising a flag on the temple and dancing for the deity. O sage, we were graced with such immense benefit even by render- ing service to Bhagavan unknowingly. What then can be said about the glory of bhakti undertaken with love?"
The second story from Bṛhan-naradiya Purana is about a bird that was shot by a hunter. It was then caught by a dog, which ran around a temple while trying to escape from the hunter. As a conse- quence of this turn of events, the bird received the benefit of having performed circumambulation (parikrama) of Bhagavan. This story could not be traced in extant editions of this Purāna.
In Narasimha Purana, chapter 33, sage Märkandeya narrates the story of a brahmana named Raivata, who was a debauchee. He brought some women for sexual pleasure to an old temple, but first cleaned it with his cloth. By virtue of this service, he was promoted to heaven for one hundred kalpas and then born as a king on earth. These stories are not to be taken as exaggerations or mere com- mendations, artha-vāda, but as statements of fact. They hint at the power of even a semblance of bhakti.
The story of Prahlada could not be traced in Narasimha Purana. This story, however, is cited by Hemadri in his Caturvarga- cintamani (Chapter 2, Part II of the Vrata-khanda). The story is summarized here as follows: After Bhagavan Narasimha Deva killed Hiranyakasipu and His anger had subsided, He began to shower His affection on Prahlada. Prahlada then inquired from Narasimha Deva how he, a mere boy, could have such resolute devotion for Him. Apparently, he had not done anything to acquire such firm devotion.
Śrī Narasimha replied that in his previous life, Prahlada was a brāhmaṇa boy named Vasudeva. Although he was learned in the Vedas, he fell into bad association. As a result, he took to drinking and became infatuated with a prostitute by the name of Vilāsini. He even resorted to stealing from others' houses just to please the prostitute. Once, at the house of Vilasinī, he had a quarrel with her. Being consumed with anger, he did not eat the whole day, and because his mind was greatly agitated, he could
8911 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
not sleep at night. As it turned out, this was the auspicious day of Narasimha-caturdasi, the appearance day of Bhagavan Narasimha. Thus, unknowingly he observed this sacred vow (vrata), and by its influence, he was born as Prahlada.
Regarding the holy name, Śrī Caitanya Mahaprabhu declared that Bhagavan has many names and that He has invested all His powers in them (Sikṣāṣṭakam 2). This subject was discussed in great detail in Bhagavat Sandarbha (Anuccheda 47). The reason why the names of Bhagavan are endowed with so much power is conveyed in SB 3.9.15 by the words avatara-guna-karma-vidambanāni, "which are representative of Your avataric descents, qualities, and divine acts." This signifies that the names of specific avatāras are identi- cal to those avataras, and thus they are endowed with the same potency. Similarly, names that represent Bhagavan's qualities are identical to Bhagavan, who possesses such qualities, and hence they also disclose His qualities. The same is true for the names that refer to specific divine acts of Bhagavan.
892
