+++
title = "158"
+++
Bhagavan Intensifies the Devotee's Prārabdha-karma
1
१५८ । केचित् तु साधारणस्यैव प्रारब्धस्य तादृशेषु भक्तेषु प्राबल्यं तदुत्कण्ठावर्धनार्थं स्वयं भगवतैव क्रियत इति मन्यन्ते । सा च वर्णिता मृगदेहं प्राप्तस्य तस्य । यथैव श्रीनारदस्य पूर्वजन्मनि जातरतेरपि कषायरक्षणमाह ( भा० १।६।२२ ) -
I
SOME PEOPLE are of the opinion that Bhagavan personally inten- sifies the normal prārabdha-karma of such devotees just to increase their longing to attain Him. The Bhāgavata in fact describes this as occurring in the case of Bharata, when he obtained the body of a deer. Another example of this is seen in the account of Śrī Nārada's past life. Although he had attained the state of rati, or "the first dawning of divine love," a trace of impurity (kaşaya) was said to be preserved in his case. This is implied in the following statement of Śrī Bhagavan:
हन्तास्मिन् जन्मनि भवान् मा मां द्रष्टुमिहार्हति । अविपक्वकषायाणां दुर्दर्शोऽहं कुयोगिनाम् ॥ ४४६ ॥
Alas, dear boy, you will not be able to see Me here in this life. I am imperceptible for immature yogis, whose impurities are unburnt. (SB 1.6.22)1
स्पष्टम् ॥ श्रीभगवान् ॥
The meaning of this statement is clear.
hantasmin janmani bhavan ma mam drastum iharhati avipakva-kaṣāyaṇām durdarso'ham kuyoginām
929
Commentary
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
ŚRI JIVA GOSVĀMI was not entirely satisfied with the explanation offered in the previous anuccheda that Bharata's attachment to a fawn must have been due to a past offense. In this regard, it must be borne in mind that Bharata was situated on a very high plat- form of bhakti. In SB 5.7.12, there is a striking description of the ecstatic symptoms of divine love that manifested in him while he was engaged in bhakti. On this basis, it is hard to believe that any past offense could have overpowered his bhakti. Moreover, it was said in Anuccheda 153 that as long as offenses are present, such symptoms will not become manifest. Hence, the fact that these symptoms were present in him suggests that he was in reality free from offense.
Taking this into consideration, Śrī Jīva here offers an alterna- tive explanation for Bharata's diverting of regard away from Bhaga- van. He reasons that it was Bhagavan's will that Bharata's attention be diverted to the fawn. In other words, it was Bhagavan Himself in the form of the deer who attracted the mind of Bharata. Who other than Bhagavan in some other form could attract his mind away from Bhagavan?
A devotee's mind is attracted to Bhagavan, even if He is not manifest in His original form. This is evident from the story of Brahma stealing the calves and cowherd friends of Kṛṣṇa. At that time, Kṛṣṇa Himself appeared in the forms of the stolen calves and cowherd boys. Thereafter, the mother cows' attraction to this new set of calves and the parents' attraction to the new set of cowherd boys far exceeded that which they felt for their own respective calves and sons. Thus, Bhagavan's intent in making Bharata become attracted to the fawn was to increase Bharata's
longing for Him.
Bhagavan sometimes covers a devotee's normal awareness for this purpose. He did so in the case of King Parīkṣit as well, who, when overcome by thirst, placed a dead snake on the shoulders of the meditating sage, Samika, feeling that the sage was intentionally ignoring him. When as a consequence of this transgression, he was
930
158 Bhagavan Intensifies the Devotee's Prärabdha-karma
cursed to die in seven days, the king gave up his kingdom and heard Śrimad Bhagavata for seven days without eating or drinking any- thing. The same person who was infuriated by a meditating sage because he was not given water to drink was then able to abstain from it for seven days. Therefore, his thirst is described as being unprecedented (abhūta-pūrva, SB 1.18.29), because it was impelled by Bhagavan's will.
Śrī Jiva also gives the example of Narada in his previous birth. As a young boy, he became a devotee by the blessings of the mahā- bhagavatas who came to stay at the house of the brāhmaṇa where his mother was a maidservant. After his mother died from a snake bite, Narada left home and journeyed northward, eventually com- ing upon a vast and formidable forest. There he meditated on Bha- gavan in accordance with the instructions imparted by the sages. After some time, the vision of Bhagavan was self-disclosed to him in the state of samadhi, but an instant later, Bhagavan disappeared. Thereupon, Narada became exceedingly restless to see his Lord again, but while remaining invisible, Bhagavan spoke to him the verse cited here (SB 1.6.22).
Narada had already attained the stage of rati, and there was no impurity in his heart. In his Krama-sandarbha commentary on SB 1.6.22, Śrī Jīva writes that in Narada's case, the impurity (kaṣāya) being referred to was his sättvika predilection for liv- ing in the forest? Yet Bhagavan spoke in such a way as to make Narada feel as though he was still subject to material desires and was thus unfit to see Him. This impelled Narada to become all the more intently absorbed in meditation. In the subsequent verse (SB 1.6.23), Bhagavan confirms that this indeed was His intent:
O sinless one, I have shown My form to you just once to arouse your longing for Me. An authentic seeker who longs for Me gradually forsakes all [other] desires lying in the heart. (SB 1.6.23)3
2
kaşăyo'tra sättviko vana-vasady-agrahaḥ
Krama-sandarbha, SB 1.6.22
sakṛd yad darsitam rupam etat kāmāya te'nagha
mat-kāmaḥ śanakaih sadhuḥ sarvan muñcati hrc-chayān
931I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
In the midst of this type of existential crisis, orchestrated by Bhagavan Himself, the devotee may not be able to discern Bhaga- van's true intent, but Krsna is perfectly aware of the underlying principle involved. The idea is that devotion is exclusively con- cerned with the intensity of loving feeling, and ultimately it is this feeling alone that captivates Bhagavan and brings Him under the devotee's control. Kṛṣṇa Himself revealed this principle to the gopis:
O My friends, I do not [visibly or immediately] reciprocate the love even of those who love Me, so that they will remain constantly absorbed in meditation on Me. Their condition is comparable to that of a destitute person, who, after acquiring wealth, suddenly loses it again. Such a person becomes absorbed only in thoughts of the lost wealth and can think of nothing else. (SB 10.32.20)*
Bhagavan exercised this principle in the case of King Bharata. This is confirmed by the fact that Bharata became all the more intently absorbed in Bhagavan in his next life as a deer as well as in his third and final birth as Jada Bharata.
4
naham tu sakhyo bhajato'pi jantun bhajamy amīṣām anuvṛtti-vṛttaye yathadhano labdha-dhane vinaşte tac-cintayanyan nibhṛto na veda
932
