+++
title = "07 Northern Panels of the Northern Path"

+++

***Transforming Power***





When the poet Kalikanri refers to this side of the sanctum in his poem about the temple, he captures the entire wall by recording its first and last panels. The rescue of the elephant Gajendra begins the sequence, and Krishna dancing on the snake Kaliya ends it: “The elephant’s arm is a hollow tube / And his leg is thick and sturdy, / But it hurt badly until / He cured it, He who / Plunged one day into / A pool of blooming flowers / To scare the snake in its water, / He whose place is beautiful Kacci / Encircled by cooling ponds, // There in the Emperor’s Vishnu-house / Built by the Sovereign of Pallavas / after the day he marched / at the head of battle / with Cobra in hand / to astonish the Southern King / of fragrant groves / and rampart walls high as mountains” \(*PT* 2.9.5\).

The first panel, depicting Gajendra’s rescue, signifies the devotee seeking refuge from the ignorance that permeates the gross physical body. The last panel, depicting Krishna dancing on the head of the snake Kaliya, signifies the elimination of that ignorance at the deepest and most subtle level of the devotee’s consciousness. In the second half of the stanza, Kalikanri correlates these first and last panels \(and therefore all six\) with Nandivarman’s victory over forces the Pandya king supported. By now Nandivarman was a Bhagavata sadhaka and gained victory once he took possession of the portion of the Kaveri River delta named after the naga species known as pampu or cobra; it includes the major harbor for international trade called “Naga’s Port City” \(Nagapattinam\).1 His possession of this region was the basis for his political status as emperor until his death in 796.

The six panels facing north in the middle-floor sanctum document the different stages of purification of consciousness within the devotee during the predawn “Brahma’s hour.” Purification begins at the northwest corner, where the final hour of night begins; it ends at the northeast corner, where the sun rises. This purification process is an “awakening” that answers the profound questions, “Who am I?” “Who are you?” The answer begins with the gross physical body, “I am who I see in a mirror”; but this body of flesh and blood is merely a garment, which is worn and then discarded, to be burned or buried \(*BG* 2.22\). The person wearing this garment is hidden from view. How do we know about it? An authoritative answer is provided by the *Taittiriya Upanishad*, whose “Brahmavalli” section takes us into the hidden dimensions of a person as far as reason can go.



## **The Person of Four Bodies**

According to the Brahmavalli section of the *Taittiriya Upanishad*, every person is made up of five layers of matter. As discussed in chapter 2, these layers move from the matter’s densest form as flesh and bone on the outside, to its form as fine as space—akasha—inside, and this finest form envelops the essential self or atman. The atman is not matter or prakriti, but pure consciousness or chitta; like a flame it provides the light of consciousness for the material layers enveloping it. Since these layers are made of matter, they are in constant motion and mingle with each other; yet as sheaths or koshas they retain their own distinct identity. Moreover, each sheath is a conscious person or purusha \(*TU* 2.1–6\). The relationship between these five sheathlike layers is complex, for each has the same shape, each envelops the sheath composed of matter less dense than it, and each permeates the sheath by which it is enveloped \(see Figure 2.2 above\).

King Ajatashatru of Kashi teaches about these sheathlike persons in the *Brihadaranyaka Upanishad* \(*BU* 2.1.16–20\). This teaching is developed further by the story of the Master of Progeny, Prajapati, as the guru of Indra \(king of devas\) and of Virochana \(king of asuras\). This story, which appears in the *Chandogya Upanishad* \(*CU* 8.6–12\), divides the person into three bodies made of matter, plus one body made of conscious perception.

First, the gross body or sthula sharira made of matter is composed of sheath 1, the person visible in the mirror. Waking consciousness or jagrat uses this gross material body to apprehend the world and itself through the six sense-actions of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, and thinking. In the story of Prajapati as guru, his asura disciple Virochana concludes that this body is the means to win both this world and the next, and ends his study with it. The story mocks this asura view \(*CU* 8.4–5\). Yet, at the end of his “Summary of the *Brahman* Doctrine” in the *Bhagavata Purana*, Krishna tells Uddhava, “This is the intelligent judgment of the wise and prudent, that One reaches Me, the True One, the Immortal One, by means of a false mortal \[body\] here \[in this world\]” \(*BP* 11.29.22\). Moreover, Virochana’s asura view appears to resemble a doctrine acclaimed by his father Prahlada in a story we shall turn to shortly.

Second, Indra continues his study with Prajapati and learns that the physical body invisible to the senses, sukshma sharira, comprises sheaths 2–4, the person made of life-breath \(*pranamaya*\), the person made of mind or mental activity \(*manasmaya*\), and the person made of discriminative or subject-object knowledge \(*vijnanamaya*\). During sleep this invisible body resides in the heart’s space or hridaya akasha, where it produces dreaming or svapna.

Third, deep dreamless sleep \(*shushupta*\) comprises sheath 5 and resides in the pericardium of the heart. This body contains the seeds of karma, and they produce the body comprising sheaths 2–4. It is therefore known as the causal dimension of the invisible body \(*karana-sukshma-sharira*\). It is also known as the jiva. The jiva in samsara is dominated by time \(*BP* 11.28.16\).

The nonmaterial atman is the fourth body or turiya. This is the highest person, the seeing person, the one who is aware, and the one who resides inside the heart. The Master of Progeny calls the heart the “fort of *brahman*” \(*brahmapura*\). Inside this fort is a lotus, and this seeing person dwells in its tiny space, where the entire universe exists \(*CU* 8.1–4\). The *Kena Upanishad* discusses the mystery of this fort of *brahman*. The *Narayana Upanishad* \(5\) identifies its lotus as Vaikuntha \(experienced as a flash of lightning in the mind\). The *Mandukya Upanishad* uses the mantra *Om* to describe it. And the *Kaushitaki Upanishad* \(1\) describes the journey to it at death. Krishna teaches Uddhava about this turiya or fourth person, and identifies himself with it \(*BP* 11.13.25–29; 11.24\). But beyond it is Narayana; He is “beyond the fourth” \(*turyatita*\), a fifth body that is incomprehensible \(*Hamsha Upanishad* 9; Deussen 1980: 2: 720\).



## **Purification on the North**

Let us now use these complex understandings of the person to interpret the six panels on the sanctum’s northern side. As we recall, they face the realm of humans during the last hour of night, and signify the Krita Yuga. The sequence begins at the northwest corner with Panel 5. The first three panels \(5–7\) represent the activity of the Plower formation’s bala or power; the second three panels \(8–10\) represent the activity of His jnana or knowledge. These panels are further examples of visual “texts” encoding several meanings in a single depiction. In all these panels, for example, a specific body of water is used to represent the devotee’s consciousness \(*chitta*\) in the devotee’s five sheathlike layers.



### *******Panel 5: Hari Rescues Gajendra***

THE STORY. The story of Gajendra takes place in the fourth Manu Term and begins with the Pandya king of Dravidas named Indradyumna \(Indra’s Strength\). He is named after Indra’s elephant Airavata.2 Indradyumna is devoted to the vows of Vishnu and worships Hari. He goes to the Malaya mountains to live in the Kulachala ashram as an ascetic with matted hair and observes a vow to worship Hari in silence. One day the sage Agastya arrives with his disciples. Indradyumna does not break his vow in order to receive the great sage hospitably, which angers Agastya. He curses the Pandyan to become an elephant, an animal whose ignorance he thinks matches Indradyumna’s. When the royal seer dies, therefore, he is reborn as an elephant, but an unusual one because he retains a memory of Hari.

Indradyumna is now an elephant like Indra’s Airavata, and is known as Indra of Elephants or Gajendra. He lives with a herd of females on the island in the Ocean of Milk that contains the mountain called Three Peaks \(Trikuta\). Measured in the distance traversed by an oxcart in one day \(*yojana*\), the mountain is ten thousand yojanas high and ten thousand yojanas wide. It has peaks of silver, of iron, and of gold—one of each, associated with devas Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. Its shore, washed by the Ocean of Milk, shines with green emeralds, and its many caves are playgrounds for celestial beings of all sorts. Animals, birds, trees, and flowers flourish in perfume wafting from the bodies of devis bathing in its many lakes \(*BP* 8.2; 8.4.18\). In one valley of the mountain there is a garden named Ritumat \(In Season\). *Ritumat* denotes the period of a woman’s monthly cycle favorable for conception.3 This garden belongs to Varuna of the west, and devis play among its luxurious and fruitful trees. It contains a large and splendid lake with golden lotuses, blue water lilies, and birds of all shapes and colors.

One day Gajendra is in rut and hot from the sun. He leads his females out of the forest into the lake to drink and playfully sprays them with his trunk. He is absorbed in this pleasure of the pond when an infuriated “grasper” \(*graha*\) grabs his back leg. The two tug each other violently with little success for a thousand years. Gajendra is weakened by the effort, and his fellow elephants cannot help. He knows his end is near. Out of distress he mentally repeats the supreme prayer \(*parama japya*\) he remembered from his previous life as the Pandyan king. In his heart Gajendra seeks refuge in Hari. But in his prayer he does not ask to be rescued from the “grasper” so that he can continue his householder pleasures. He asks instead to be rescued from the ignorance that Time alone cannot remove \(*BP* 8.3.1–29\). He takes refuge in the Bhagavan, because as the source of his problem he is its solution; the lord of the sense of “This am I” is the Plower.4

Hari seated on Garuda \(who is made of Vedic mantras\) immediately appears, his wheel flashing as devas sing his praise. Gajendra sees Hari, holds a lotus with his trunk as if for an offering, and with great difficulty says, “I venerate Narayana, the guru of all, the Bhagavan.” In an instant Hari dismounts from Garuda, pulls both grasper and elephant out of the water, slices open the grasper’s jaws with his wheel, and frees the elephant. Devas, seers, gandharvas, Brahma, and Shiva rain down flowers. The gandharvas sing and dance, and seers, charanas, and siddhas praise the Supreme Person.

Instantly, the grasper turns into the foremost gandharva, named Huhu; the seer Devala had cursed him long ago, but now he is free from sin. Huhu praises Hari, circumambulates him, prostrates at his feet, and leaves for the gandharva realm near Mount Meru.5 Hari touches Gajendra, and he is instantly freed from ignorance and given a body with four arms and a yellow garment resembling Hari’s own \(*BP* 8.4.6\). Hari takes him away to his own residence \(*BP* 8.4.13\). Gajendra resides there in the emancipated condition known as “having the same form” \(*sarupya*\) as Hari. Hari also makes this promise in the hearing of all \(which I have edited for clarification\):


Whoever arises as night ends in the west, intently devoted and truly absorbed,/

certainly shall be freed if he recollects these My shapes://

\[*Gajendra and White Island in the Ocean of Milk*\]

Me and you, the waters of this pond, the mountain and its caves,/

the groves of the devas’ trees;//

The abodes on mountain peaks belonging to Brahma, to Me, and to Shiva,/

My beloved Ocean of Milk, and White Island My luminous home;//

\[*Hari’s Material Form*\]

Shrivatsa, Kaustubha, the garland, My mace Kaumodaki,/

the wheel Sudarshana, the conch Panchajanya, Garuda the ruler of birds;//

And Shesha My secret part, Goddess Shri inseparable from Me,/

Brahmins, the rishi Narada, Bhava, and Prahlada too;//

\[*Hari’s Deeds*\]

My deeds as Fish, Tortoise, Boar, and other avataras,/

the infinitely pure actions of Surya the Sun, Soma the Moon, Fire the eater of oblations;//

\[*The Foundation of the Universe*\]

The pranava Om, True Being, the Unmanifest, inspired singers of mantras, imperishable dharma,/

Daksha’s daughters who are wives of Dharma, Soma, and Kashyapa;//

\[*The Realm of Heaven*\]

Ganga, Sarasvati, Nanda, Kalindi, the White Elephant Airavata,/

Dhruva the pole star, the Brahma rishis, and the renowned Seven,/

the descendents of Manu.// …

Those who awaken and while night falls way sing of Me as illustrated here,/

To them, when life nears its end, I will give undefiled understanding.// \(BP 4.17–25\)


Thus Hari promises that those who rise before sunrise during Brahma’s hour, bathe and pray, and in their prayers remind themselves of this and other episodes, will be freed from all sins and will remember Hari at the time of their death. They will escape Yama’s purgatorial realm and go directly to him in Vaikuntha, as depicted below on the bottom floor in this same northwest corner \(Panel N1\).

THE PANEL. Figure 7.1 views the panel from above. It depicts the instant when Hari appears in response to Gajendra’s mental act of seeking in Narayana refuge from ignorance. The panel is rich in information, and we shall discuss it by dividing the depiction horizontally into two overlapping parts. In the part above, the crowned Hari, dressed royally and with two pairs of hands, sits on the shoulders of Garuda. He gazes directly northward toward the viewer as his head tilts slightly westward. Hari’s back left hand holds the base of the conch, and his back right hand holds the base of what may be a prayogachakra: the rim of the wheel faces the viewer as if about to be thrown. Hari raises his front right hand diagonally eastward and forms what may be the nyasamudra: the hand is open, but the middle finger bends downward to the palm \(*PS* 1974: 71\). He rests his front left hand on his thigh and forms the dhyanamudra: the hand bends down toward the viewer, the thumb extends sideways, and the fingers curl inward \(*PS* 1974: 103\).




FIGURE 7.1. Panel 5: Hari rescues Gajendra. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Two male figures wearing crowns fly in mirrored postures at the top of the panel, and mark the panel’s central axis with their upraised arms. Remains of what may have been halos appear behind the heads of both figures \(most notably in the figure on the east\). They appear to signify Surya the Sun moving from the east and Soma the Moon moving to the west as night’s final hour begins.

In the lower part of the panel, the kite bird Garuda has the shape of a man but the beak of a bird \(Figure 7.2\). He gazes slightly downward as he flies, his right leg bending upward at the knee toward the east as his left leg stretches down to the west. Directly beneath his right foot at the bottom center of the panel stands the small figure of the elephant Gajendra \(this bottom scene depicts what Hari sees\). Gajendra stands oriented eastward and bends the tip of his trunk toward his mouth, perhaps holding a freshly plucked lotus blossom. A female companion facing east stands behind him. In contrast to her, however, Gajendra turns his head northward, looking at Hari as depicted above. The grasper, who is portrayed as the crocodile-like water beast called makara, emerges from the lower northwest corner and has Gajendra’s back left leg in his mouth.




FIGURE 7.2. Detail of Panel 5: Gajendra beneath Garuda. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


A female stands at the base of the panel east of Gajendra and faces north, her head at the level of Garuda’s right knee. She rests her right hand on her hip, but raises her left hand in what may be the abhayamudra of protection. Her identity is uncertain, but she may depict the pond Ritumat as a woman during her ritu period. A larger male stands on the western side of the panel above the grasping makara, his head with a tall crown reaching to Hari’s left elbow. His western location and proximity to the makara identifies him as Varuna, who dwells in the west as emperor of asuras noted for their grasping, lustful nature. He stands in veneration as owner of the garden and lake, and as ruler of night during which householders fulfill their ritumat duty.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. The Ritumat lake is the first body of water we shall encounter in these north-facing panels. It denotes consciousness in the sheath of the body made of gross matter or “food” \(*annamayakosha*\). During the darkness of night erotic desire \(*kama*\) propels husband and wife to conception, and in doing so entangles them in repeated death and birth. This is all the Plower’s doing, for this formation creates ignorance and destroys it \(*BP* 4.24–35; 8.3.18 and 29\). Consequently, when Gajendra took refuge in “the embodiment of jnana,” he asked that this first of Vasudeva’s formations reverse its function as obscurer and destroy the sense of “I” that was obscuring the knowledge of his true Self.

The details of the narrative match the panel’s location at the northwest corner, for the mountain called Three Peaks is on an island northwest of Bharata. It lies in the Ocean of Milk; it will be known as White Island \(Shvetadvipa\) after the Bhagavan takes up residence there in the next Manu Term, the fifth.6 He will create the Vaikuntha realm on earth and will be born there along with Vaikuntha devas with the name Vaikuntha \(*BP* 8.5.4–6\). The *Bhagavata Purana*, however, assumes its location is known and does not specify it.

The story of Gajendra’s emancipation \(*gajendramoksha*\) represents the first step in the devotee’s purification. It is the plea to be rescued from the grasp of ignorance at the base of carnal desire. The devotee makes this plea when taking refuge in an acharya. There the refugee learns the rites and prayers of recitation \(*sankirtana*\), notably “Vishnu’s Thousand Names” \(*vishnusahasranama*\), which Bhishma teaches in the *Mahabharata*. The later acharya Parasara Bhattar taught that all people, including Shudras, women, and those of the “impure” castes may, at any time, utter \(*japa*\) these thousand names in recitation \(*sankirtana*\). If they do so with a pure mind, their japa will lead eventually to emancipation \(*moksha*\) \(Bhattar 1983: 50–65\).

Thus this panel signifies Hari’s response to the act of taking refuge \(*prapatti*\) at the beginning of night’s final hour. Hari’s two mudras \(if they are correctly identified\) signify the rites of this act. By means of nyasa \(Hari’s right-hand mudra\), the devotee purifies his body with mantras. Then by means of dhyana \(Hari’s left-hand mudra\), he visualizes the Bhagavan and approaches Him as a refugee \(*prapanna*\).

The panel uses Gajendra to represent the householder’s consciousness newly awakened in his gross body and dominated by the consciousness of “This I am” \(*ahamkara*\). His ego is in the grip of sexual desire or kama, a necessary desire, because it enables householders to continue family lineages by means of copulation or samslesha, which is a householder’s dharma. Yet kama can lead the soul to endless death and birth.

But Gajendra also identifies this devotee as a Dravida king: a\) the elephant as a royal emblem signifies the king’s authority and power, and his realm’s prosperous fertility; b\) the elephant is a symbol of the ego as ignorant and lustful, resembling a rutting elephant capable of great violence \(for example, Kamsa’s elephant Kuvalayapida\); and c\) this elephant’s previous life as the Pandya king Indradyumna, famous in Dravida as Hari’s devotee, points to Nandivarman, likewise famous in Dravida as Hari’s devotee.

The story illustrated by the panel thus exemplifies Hari’s gracious response to the rite of seeking refuge, sharana, when it is performed with the true intent and complete attention generated by deeply felt anxiety \(*bhaya*\). Like Gajendra, the royal devotee faces the limit of self-reliance, relies instead on the Bhagavan, and uses a rite he already knows how to perform. Hari responds with bala, the power produced by jnana to slaughter one aspect of the devotee \(the grasping kama resident in his gross body\) in order to transform another aspect \(the consciousness of “This I am”\).

Gajendra’s transformation into a small replica of Hari illustrates the transformed ego’s new sense of self: “Who am I? I am Hari, for I now have his shape. If I look in a mirror I see him. Yet Hari and I are not completely the same, because I and others like me dwell with him in Vaikuntha.” This mode of emancipation \(*mukti*\) is described as “dwelling in the same world” \(*salokya*\) and “having the same shape” \(*sarupya*\), and is the gift of jnana’s transforming bala.

Finally, this act of taking refuge at the end of each night of a Bhagavata’s life repeats the act he performed at the feet of his acharya, when he sought to become the protected property of the Bhagavan through consecration or diksha. Every subsequent rite of seeking refuge or sharanagati implies his acharya, and he appears in the next panel as Rama.



### ***Panel 6: Rama Disciplines Ocean on the Way to Lanka***

Kalikanri selected this panel as the subject of his poem’s eighth stanza: “Once a King of vigor / With the Umbrella of a hero / And an army of monkeys / Blocked the sea with mountains—/ He is my Father the Lord / Whose place in beautiful Kacci / Ringed by ornate halls // Is the Emperor’s Vishnu-house / Served by the Sovereign of Pallavas / who seized the Spear of War / in his right hand / and with the power of an army / frightened in Nenmeli / the virile Villavan bull, / the Cheran who owns the Bow” \(*PT* 2.9.8\). The Chera king bears the title “Owner of the Bow” \(*villavan*\) and appears in the second stanza of this same poem. The ancient Chera capital was Karuvur, modern-day Karur in Tiruchinappalli District, on a river that flows into the Kaveri River \(Nagaswamy 1995: 107–112\). The bow \(*vil*\) was the Chera dynastic emblem. Kalikanri’s use of the Rama story in the first half of this stanza implies that the Cheran of the second half was analogous to the rakshasa Ravana ruling the island Lanka to the south.

THE STORY. According to the *Bhagavata Purana’s* telling of the Rama story \(*BP* 9.10–11\), Rama, Lakshmana, and the army of monkeys reach the sea on their southward journey to retrieve Sita from Ravana. The sea roars wildly in protest, but when Rama glares at it angrily the ocean \(*sindhu*\) takes form and appears with gifts to seek shelter at his feet. The ocean as person confesses that Rama is the Person controlling the universe. “You are free to cross the sea to conquer Ravana,” he says. “Build a bridge that will spread your fame and kings will come to see it when they perform the ceremony of conquering the four directions \(*digvijaya*\).” And so they do. Ravana’s youngest brother, Vibhishana, leads Rama, Lakshmana, and the monkey army to Lanka \(*BP* 9.10.12–16\). After he kills Ravana and retrieves Sita, Rama installs Vibhishana as Lanka’s king with a life span that will last until the end of this kalpa. Rama returns to Ayodhya in the north and receives the unction of kingship in the manner of Indra’s abhisheka \(*BP* 10.10.49–51\).

Valmiki in his *Ramayana* tells this episode in greater detail. He begins it with Vibhishana just after he flees from his elder brother, Ravana, to take refuge with Rama across the sea \(*Ram* 6.19–22\). At Rama’s command and in the presence of the foremost monkeys, Lakshmana uses ocean water to consecrate him king of rakshasas in place of Ravana. As Lanka’s new ruler, Vibhishana advises Rama that the best way to cross Varuna’s watery abode is to approach Ocean \(*sagara*\) directly. Since Rama’s own ancestor, Sagara, dug out the sea and his descendent Bhagiratha filled it up, Ocean is Sagara’s creation; he will surely help him throw an embankment across himself to Lanka. Rama agrees. Just as fire ascends an altar, Rama proceeds with Lakshmana and the monkeys to the shore where a grass called kusha or darbha grows.7

Kusha grass is an important purifier in Vedic ritual, and Rama spreads it on the shore to begin a rite of forbearance \(*kshama*\). He joins his palms to venerate Ocean and resolves, “I shall cross Ocean or I shall die,” and lies down on the grass near the sea. He faces east and uses his right upper arm as a pillow \(*Ram* 6.21.1–9\); this means his head is south and his feet are north. Lakshmana stands guard. Three nights roll by as Rama silently waits for Ocean to appear, but he waits in vain. By now Rama is furious and threatens to dry up the makaras’ abode, because Ocean construes his forbearance as weakness. He tells Lakshmana to bring him his bow and arrows so he may attack Varuna’s abode for Danu’s many asura sons \(*danavas*\). The monkeys shall cross on dry land.

With bow in hand and eyes wide in anger, Rama is as terrifying as the fire that will burn up this kalpa. He shoots his arrows at Varuna’s abode and it heaves wildly, a mass of clashing waves tossing out terrified animals, asuras, and nagas. Lakshmana immediately runs to his elder brother, takes hold of his bow, and urges him to stop, because men like him do not act out of anger. He urges Rama to find another way to cross the sea, and brahma-seers and deva-seers invisible in the sky above cry out their agreement.

Nevertheless, Rama continues his threat to dry up Ocean down to the depth of Patala. He takes one arrow and infuses it with an “arrow” of Brahma, which means a mantra.8 It is now Brahma’s rod \(*brahmadanda*\). He fixes it to his bow, pulls the bowstring, and bends the bow to its limit. Rama’s powerful pull darkens the world in chaos, and Ocean floods his boundaries for miles around, but Rama does not move. Ocean clad in red, gold, and jewels finally emerges from his own waves in the company of fiery-mouthed serpents and rivers led by Ganga and Sindhu. As his waves throw huge makaras, serpents, and rakshasas in confusion, Ocean joins his palms to venerate Rama. He pleads that as one of matter’s five elements he cannot solidify his watery expanse, but he can keep graspers \(*graha*\) at bay and provide the monkeys a foothold.

Rama has achieved his goal without shooting his powerful brahmadanda, but it is activated and he must shoot it somewhere. Ocean suggests he send it north to the region of Drumakulya, where sinners led by Abhiras drink his waters, something Ocean finds intolerable. Rama shoots Brahma’s rod northward, and it falls in a region that comes to be known as Desert Wilderness \(*marukantara*\), corresponding approximately to Marwar and Bikaner in contemporary Rajasthan. The arrow dries up the region’s waters, but leaves a well called Vrana filled by Rasatala’s brackish waters from beneath the earth.9

Ocean advises Rama to have Nala build a bridge to span him and then disappears. Nala, the monkey son of the deva architect named Maker of All \(Vishvakarman\), says that Ocean is allowing Rama to cross him out of fear, not because he wants to see a bridge built. But he is quite capable of bridging Varuna’s abode, he says, so Rama appoints him the leader of the other monkeys. In five days they build a bridge ten yojanas wide and one hundred yojanas long. Vibhishana guards the southern shore as Rama and Lakshmana cross with the monkeys to Lanka, whereupon devas suddenly appear with siddhas, charanas, and great seers to consecrate Rama with highly auspicious water.10 They urge him now to conquer his enemies and rule earth and sea for years without number \(*Ram* 6.22.88–89\).

The seer Markandeya also tells the Rama story in the *Mahabharata* \(*Mbh* 3.261–276; van Buitenen 2.731–760\). He begins this episode with Rama speaking on the ocean shore \(in van Buitenen’s translation, 2.746\): “I shall attack the ocean with a ruse and press it back; and the One who dwells underneath will show himself to me. And if he does not show a way, I shall set it afire with mighty and irresistible missiles that blaze fiercely with fire and wind.” Ocean then appears in a dream and gives in to Rama’s threat to dry him up with enchanted arrows. He advises Rama to have Nala make a causeway in the ocean with wood, straw, and rock. Nala’s Bridge is ten leagues wide, a hundred long, and it still exists, Markandeya says, tall as a mountain.

Vibhishana and four councilors later meet Rama at the bridge, having crossed the ocean, it appears, on the causeway. Once Rama is sure of Vibhishana’s loyalty, he consecrates him king of all rakshasas and appoints him Lakshmana’s counselor. Vishishana tells Rama how to cross his army over the causeway in the space of a month. Rama kills the ten-headed Ravana and gives Lanka to Vibhishana \(van Buitenen 2.747, 756\).

Another telling of this episode appears in Pravarasena’s fifth-century Prakrit narrative “Constructing the Bridge” \(*Setubandha*\). It describes the bridge building in elaborate detail and was probably well known in eighth-century Kanchipuram.11 In this telling, however, the one who advises Rama to subdue Ocean with his bow is Brahma’s monkey or ape son, Jambavat, whose daughter Jambavati will later be the mother of Krishna’s son Samba. “The sea fills only a part of your belly, it is amazing that it perplexes you,” Jambavat says to Rama \(4.39\).12 Shortly thereafter Vibhishana flies over from Lanka, takes refuge in Rama, and Rama anoints him \(4.51–65\). The next morning, when Rama sees that Ocean has not given in, his wrath swells, his face glares as he knits his brows and his knotted hair falls loose. Rama, otherwise so gentle, assumes a ferocity like the sun at the kalpa’s end as he looks to his bow. After a long silence he picks it up and speaks this dire resolve: “Let the earth be split, let the sea perish, let the world vanish\!” \(5.16–17, 20: modified\). Rama shoots his fiery arrows into the sea and it boils ferociously, but then Ocean appears and falls at Rama’s feet along with Ganga, his consort \(6.7–8\). He agrees to have a causeway \(*setu*\) built, but the monkeys are successful only when Nala guides them \(8.18–27\). Their formidably massive causeway stretches into the sea and divides it into two, as if Death were reaching out to destroy Ravana and his kin \(8.88\).

THE PANEL. This panel captures Rama’s anger addressed to Ocean, in whose place the viewer stands \(Figure 7.3\). Rama stands on the east and the smaller Lakshmana stands to the west, with a Brahma rishi sitting above him on an open lotus blossom. Each figure has one pair of arms. Rama is dressed royally and stands in a posture of stern countenance. He holds the middle of his bow with his right hand; his left arm is broken off, but its hand at the panel’s visual center forms the fist of the balimudra or mushtimudra: the thumb folds over the fingers curled into the palm \(*PS* 1974: 46, 107\). Lakshmana’s left hand rests on his hip, and his right hand forms what may be the ankushamudra. This is the mudra of the pointed prod \(*ankusha*\) used by a mahout to guide his elephant: the forefinger and thumb curl to form the shape of a hook, the remaining fingers curl toward the palm \(*PS* 1974: 41\). The mudra formed by the seer sitting above Lakshmana is too badly damaged to decipher.




FIGURE 7.3. Panel 6: Rama disciplines Ocean on the way to Lanka. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel signifies the Bhagavan’s transforming bala as it acts upon the refugee \(*prapanna*\). Rama’s angry glare points to the acharya’s discipline of the refugee’s ocean of consciousness after the monkey mind is brought under control. The roaring ocean full of grasping serpents, rakshasas, and asuras represents the refugee’s ego-centered mental activity raging against the calm submission demanded by the acharya. Rama’s anger and its threat of the ultimate weapon denote the Plower’s power \(*bala*\) acting on the sadhaka through the acharya. The badly damaged mudra formed Rama’s left at the panel’s center must signify this meaning.

A second layer of meaning points to the bala acting through the acharya to discipline the sheath of made of breath \(*pranamayakosha*\) in the gross body of the refugee. By disciplining consciousness in this body of breath, bala affects consciousness in the remaining three bodies. In addition, the raging Ocean resisting Rama is the refugee’s mind resisting the acharya’s required discipline of his breath through pranayama; typically this is systematic extension and calming of irregular breathing. But to perform this breath control the refugee must first unify his gross body by sitting in a disciplined posture called asana.

We also see that the monkeys in this episode \(not depicted but implied\) represent the devotee’s thinking brought into focus by this pranayama. Normal breathing allows for normal thinking, which, like wild monkeys, is uncontrolled, affectionate, familial, violent, and sexually promiscuous. But these are focused monkeys of the mind, and they embank the already pacified mental ocean, building a levee stretching from the shore to Lanka.

Still another meaning of this levee, the setu, lies in its connection to Vibhishana. Vibhishana in this context denotes the future of Nandivarman as the royal sadhaka. Just as the righteous demon Vibhishana will rule Lanka under the imperial authority of the enthroned Rama, so the impure yet purified Nandivarman will rule under the authority of his enthroned acharya, as depicted on the prakara wall discussed in chapter 4. The setu over which Vibhishana guides Rama’s monkeys represents the means to this future. Even in Markandeya’s telling, where Vibhishana takes refuge after Nala has already built the bridge, the rakshasa crosses it from Lanka to seek refuge in Rama, and then leads Rama’s forces over it back to Lanka. In Pravarasena’s telling, the setu stretches north from the Malaya mountain south to Lanka’s Suvela mountain, and the monkeys march across it on their own \(*BP* 8.99–100\). Vibhishana’s troops then lead Rama’s army from the Suvela mountain into Lanka, because they know the way and the rakshasas’ resources, and are skilled in both deceitful and legitimate methods of war \(*Setubandhu* 12.34\).

The implied setu—the bridge, embankment, or causeway the monkeys will build—signifies the acharya’s discipline of the resident refugee. The setu is the techniques and disciplines the sadhaka learns in order to calm waking consciousness in the gross body by bringing mind-suffused breath under control. One characteristic method is to “stretch the breath out” \(*prana-ayama*\). Markandeya gives this meaning of *setu* in another *Mahabharata* teaching \(*Mbh* 3.203.35–40\). An impure hunter once told the pure Brahmin Kausika that “Greed and anger must be tamed by any means; this is the purifying agent of sacrifice, and this self-mortification is regarded as the bridge.13 Nala’s Bridge denotes taming greed and anger under the acharya’s discipline.

Life with the acharya is not easy, because the candidate is generally “dammed up” and “bounded.” Even before the Vibhava-diksha, which the next panel represents, candidates who are non-Brahmins or especially sinful Brahmins must undergo the cleansing Man-lion Consecration. Once that is over, they must develop skill in rites such as repeating mantras \(*japa*\), offering oblations \(*homa*\), and fulfilling vowed disciplines \(*vrata*\) directed to a selected secondary emanation \(*vibhava*\) of God. This may take twelve days or eight months, depending on the caste of the candidate and the degree of sinfulness, which the discerning acharya can determine merely by looking at him or her. For twelve days prior to the consecration the refugee fasts, sings praises, collects materials needed for rites, cuts nails and hair, and recites the Vasudevamantra four hundred times for four days. And immediately prior to the ceremony the candidate is to bathe four times within twelve hours \(*SS* 16.1–41; Smith 1975: 526\).

Also, importantly, Rama’s anger depicted in the panel is an example of the way the sadhaka is not to behave. Hanuman says in the *Bhagavata Purana* that Vasudeva becomes Rama not only to destroy the rakshasas but also to teach people how to behave \(*BP* 5.19.5\). At the ocean, Lakshmana and the seers make it clear that Rama’s angry threat is not appropriate to righteous people. The sadhaka is to imitate Ocean’s final acquiescence, not Rama’s threatening anger; it is appropriate only to an acharya when dealing with an “ungrateful” disciple.

Another meaning we can find in this panel comes from the fact that Rama uses this monkey-built levee to cross to Lanka; this is bala crossing by means of disciplined thought into the pacified sheath of mental activity \(*manomayakosha*\). We also note that Rama slays Ravana in Lanka; this is bala eradicating from mental activity its demonic claim: “This is mine, and I shall take whatever I want.” Finally, Rama then authorizes Vibhishana’s rule of Lanka for the rest of Brahma’s daytime; this is bala’s subjection of demonic wisdom and devotion in the devotee’s mind to the continuing authority of his acharya, who is represented by Rama anointed as king in Ayodhya.

This panel alludes to two others nearby. First, the ocean as Rama’s kinsman evokes the stories of the seer Kapila and the descent of Ganga River to fill up the sea after Agastya drank it dry \(*BP* 9.8 and 9.9.1–15\). Kapila refers to the acharya teaching the samkhya and yoga of bhakti \(*BP* 3.25.32–44\); a panel on the bottom floor very close in position to this one foretells Kapila’s birth \(Panel N3\). Second, the descent of the Ganga River alludes to the waters used in the acharya’s unction in preparation for the rites he performs for the sadhaka. These unction waters appear twice in Valmiki’s telling: in Rama’s consecration after he crosses to Lanka, and in his consecration as emperor in Ayodhya after he slays Ravana and returns with Sita. The waters used in the sadhaka’s unction appear as the ocean water used to install Vibhishana as Lanka’s ruler under Rama’s authority. The sadhaka’s consecration and sadhana appear in the next panel.



### ***Panel 7: Hari as Ajita Churns the Ocean of Milk***

THE STORY. The story this panel represents is the first of three episodes in a famous narrative about the Bhagavan and kingship. This Vishnu-house illustrates all three episodes. The conclusion of the first episode appears here \(Panel 7\). The crucial event of the second episode appears at the southwest corner on the vimana below \(Panel S6\). And the conclusion of the third episode appears opposite this panel on the sanctum’s southern side \(Panel 19\).

In the *Bhagavata Purana*, the lengthy narrative of the Churning of the Milk Ocean is told immediately after the story of Gajendra \(*BP* 8.5–12\). The Gajendra story takes place in the fourth Manu Term. In the fifth Manu Term, a part of the Bhagavan appears on Earth as Vaikuntha, the son of Shubhra and his wife Vikuntha. At the request of Goddess Rama the Charming, he creates his abode known as Vaikuntha on Trikuta or White Island in the ocean northwest of Mount Meru. In the sixth Manu Term, a portion \(*amsha*\) of the Bhagavan appears as Master of the Moving Universe withh the name Ajita, “The Unconquered.” Ajita has appeared in a body of purity \(*sattva*\) to protect the universe, but requires the presence of his majesty, Goddess Shri the Charming, to complete himself as ruler. But she has not yet appeared. This first episode describes how Ajita uses the devas and asuras to churn the majesty and wealth of Goddess Shri into this sixth Manu Term for his own sake as ruler. It also describes how Ajita churns into manifestation the accoutrements of kingship, which are divided between Indra, Bali, and himself. And it explains that Ajita favors the devas over the asuras, and therefore churns up amrita for their prosperous longevity. But all of this exists only so long as Shiva contains death; when the time is right he will release its poison like a serpent.

To set the stage for this episode, let us examine the ocean to be churned. At the beginning of this kalpa, Shuka tells Parikshit, Goddess Earth spreads out like an open lotus blossom. It rises from the pond of pure water formed by the mountainous boundary between directional space \(*loka*\) and nondirectional space \(*aloka*\) called Lokaloka. But Priyavrata, son of Svayambhuva Manu and a grandson of Brahma, circumambulates directional space in a chariot seven times and leaves seven ruts on earth. They fill with different kinds of liquids and form concentric continents with oceans on both sides \(*dvipa*\) \(*BP* 5.1.30–35\). The fifth ocean from the center is this one which is churned. It surrounds the continent called Krauncha, which may explain why Krauncha’s residents worship the Bhagavan as water; “milk” was added to the water surrounding Krauncha to form the Milk Ocean. Shuka says this “milk” is sap from the shrubs, grasses, creepers, and medicinal plants that Vishnu tells devas to throw into it.14

After Gajendra takes refuge in Hari in the fourth Manu Term, Hari’s realm of Vaikuntha enters into Brahma’s material body in the fifth Manu Term. Vaikuntha becomes an island “beyond darkness” in earth’s ocean northwest of the central mountain Meru. A portion \(*amsha*\) of the Unobstructed formation is born there as Ajita \(Unconquered\) \(*BP* 8.5.24\). In the sixth Manu Term, Ajita turns his portion of the ocean into the Ocean of Milk and churns it to produce the elements of royal rule for devas and asuras subordinate to his authority.

The story begins when Shiva, as the seer Durvasas, curses Indra, and the devas become vulnerable to asura attacks.15 Indra of the east and Varuna of the west join together and lead devas to Mount Meru seeking Brahma’s help. But his help is useless, so Brahma and Bhava \(who is Shiva\) go with them to Hari’s abode beyond darkness in the Ocean and Brahma prays to him. Hari appears in the shape to be worshiped through the yoga of the Vedas and Tantras for the sake of the highest goal: He has a form bright as a thousand rising suns, is emerald blue in complexion, garbed in yellow, and accompanied by weapons in the forms of persons \(*BP* 8.6.1–15\). Hari could solve the problem himself, of course, but he wants to enjoy himself with the churning of the ocean and what follows it. He therefore advises the devas to make peace with the asuras, for time is now in their favor. Join with them in churning the Ocean to obtain amrita, he says, and wait until time turns in your favor. Agree to whatever terms they propose. Throw shrubs, grasses, creepers, and medicinal plants into the Milk Ocean, use Mandara Mountain to churn, and use the royal snake Vasuki for the rope. With my help, he continues, asuras will do the work and you devas will grab the fruits. Don’t be afraid when the poison called kalakuta emerges; don’t be greedy for any other objects that will appear; and don’t be angry if anyone prevents you from possessing them. The Supreme Hari then disappears, Brahma returns to Mount Meru, Bhava goes to Mount Kailasa, and Indra leads devas to Bali’s realm under Earth. Indra persuades Bali to combine forces with him in order to churn the Milk Ocean and obtain amrita. After all, he points out, their father is Kashyapa and they are brothers. \(This alliance will lead the Bhagavan to take the form of Vamana the Dwarf to subdue Bali in our seventh Manu Term, as illustrated on this sanctum by Panels 13–15.\)

The combined deva and asura forces go to the golden mountain called Mandara \(Sluggish\), lift it up, and carry it toward the sea. But it is heavy and they drop it, killing and injuring many. Hari appears on Garuda, revives and heals devas \(but not asuras\), lifts the golden Mandara onto Garuda, mounts the bird, and flies off with it to the sea. Garuda then puts Mandara on the seashore and with Hari’s permission flies away. The deva and asura sons of Kashyapa now persuade Vasuki, who rules naga snakes in the dark underworld waters, to act as the churning rope, promising him a share of the amrita. They wind him around Mandara, Hari takes hold of Vasuki’s head, and devas line up with him. The asuras are left with Vasuki’s end, which they think is beneath their dignity, so Hari and devas change places with them. They begin pulling Vasuki back and forth to churn the sea, but the heavy Mandara sinks into the waters. Even together devas and asuras can’t lift it up.

Hari takes charge once again. He appears as the wondrous Primordial Tortoise \(Adikacchapa\). The Bhagavan’s power of sustaining \(*adharashakti*\) supports this Primordial Tortoise, who in turn supports Ananta the Snake on whose hood the brahmanda rests. \(The Primordial Tortoise appears below in Panel W1\). Now, however, Hari becomes this tortoise inside the brahmanda. He rests on the bottom of the Ocean holding Mandara on his back. Hari then pervades the asuras and devas to energize them, anesthetizes Vasuki, and stands beside Mandara, propping it up with one of his thousand hands placed on its top.16 Brahma and others watch from above and toss flowers on the extraordinary events below.

Now asuras and devas churn wildly, but Vasuki’s heavy breaths are hot fumes painful to everyone, so Hari brings a cooling breeze. Still nothing has appeared from the sea. Hari takes over once again and with great vigor pulls Vasuki back and forth with his many arms and now things begin to emerge. The first is kalakuta, “time’s trap” or “black deception,” a deadly poison produced by the halahala plant, and its deadly fumes spread in all directions.17

To get help with this poison, the “masters of progeny” \(*prajapati*\) who protect life fly to snowy white mount Kailasa, where Shiva dwells as Sadashiva \(Ever-auspicious\). His emblem is the bull \(*vrishanka*\),18 and his companion is the daughter of Daksha \(Adroit in Sacrifice\), the devi known as Uma, the Mother who becomes everything \(*bhavani*\). The prajapatis take refuge in Sadashiva sitting with Bhavani and offer him a prayer. It resembles the prayer Gajendra made to Hari and the prayers Brahma offered before and after Hari appeared for worship through Veda and Tantra \(*BP* 8.7.21–35\). The prajapatis identify Sadashiva as the source of bondage and liberation \(the Plower’s function\). They say he is the origin of the Three Material Forms \(*trimurti*\) through his transformation of the threads of matter, and is Ruler of the Moving Universe \(*jagadishvara*\) in whom that matter exists. They describe him as the womb of sound \(*shabdayoni*\); as the primal atman of the moving universe \(*jagatadiratma*\); and as the essential nature \(*svabhava*\) of breath \(*prana*\), of the sense organs \(*indriya*\), of their objects \(*dravya*\), and of their qualities or threads \(*guna*\). He is time \(*kala*\), will \(*kratu*\), truth \(*satya*\), order \(*rita*\), righteousness \(*dharma*\), and the basis of the threefold syllable Om \(*aum*\). And his body and Brahma’s body correspond \(*BP* 8.7.22–28\).

Their prayer takes a different course, however, when they introduce a liturgy for the Linga of Five Faces \(*panchamukhalinga*\), which must have been performed in the temples Pallavas built for Shiva in the seventh and eighth centuries:19

That which is called Shiva is the absolute supreme principle which is its own light. It has five faces in the form of five secrets \(*upanishad*\), and thirty-eight mantras. His shadow is disorder \(*adharma*\); his three eyes are purity, passion, and darkness in the re-emanation of the universe \(*visarga*\); and his glance is the texts composed of meters. The Supreme Light is *brahman* without division, beyond purity, passion, and darkness, and is not accessible to the world guardians, to Brahma, to Vaikuntha, and to Indra and the others.

The Ever-auspicious is indifferent to the universe he makes when, at the end of time, he burns it through the fire of his third eye. That indifference matches his indifference when he burns Kama, the deva of desire, when he conquers the Three Cities,20 when he subjugates Yama the deva of death, when he destroys Daksha’s sacrifice, when he drinks the kalakuta poison, and when he kills many beings.

Some disparage him because he is always with Uma, thinking him intensely attached to her, though gurus meditate on his feet at the center of consciousness in the heart. Some consider him a ferocious person dwelling in cremation grounds, though he is always disciplined by ascetic practice \(*tapas*\). If even Brahma cannot understand him, how can they, who are Brahma’s descendents?

Nevertheless, the prajapatis conclude, the incomprehensible Sadashiva appears on mount Kailasa with the Goddess for the sake of the world \(*BP* 8.7.29–35\).

In this long prayer the prajapatis praise Shiva as if he were the Plower formation, who provides the basis for everything by obscuring jnana. They identify him with the cult of the Linga of Five Faces, and we know from Akrura’s prayer discussed in chapter 6 that one of five ways people worship Narayana is in the shape of Shiva according to the path he teaches, but with differences according to the acharya \(*BP* 10.40.8\).

Sadashiva responds graciously. He deflects the exalted status the prajapatis assign him by subordinating his self to the Bhagavan in accord with the Pancharatra teaching that Shiva is the Plower’s instrumental servant.21 Shiva says that he is a “good person” \(*sadhu*\) devoted to Hari \(*BP* 8.7.36–40\). \(He will make a similar move when Krishna attacks Bana, his ardent devotee and Bali’s eldest son: *BP* 10.62.2–51; 10.63.34–45\). This Great God \(Mahadeva\) then receives Goddess Bhavani’s approval and collects the kalakuta poison in his palms and drinks it. This liquid of defilement \(*jalakalmasha*\) turns Sadashiva’s throat dark blue, a sign that he feels the sufferings of others—and this is the best worship of the atman of all persons. All progeny, Daksha’s daughter, Brahma, and Vaikuntha praise this act by Shambu \(the Benevolent\), the deva of devas.

Finally, Shuka reports that when Sadashiva drinks the poisoned water, some of the kalmasha drips from his cupped hands and it is absorbed by scorpions, snakes \(*ahi*\), plants, and things that bite and sting \(*BP* 8.7.44–46\). The snake whose bite Parikshit awaits, and the snake Krishna will banish from the pool of the Yamuna River, embody this kalmasha spilled from Shiva’s hands as the deadliest pollution in the deepest level of consciousness deluded by the Plower’s inebriation.

Devas and asuras begin again to churn the Milk Ocean, and seven items now appear sequentially. First is the cow who holds the oblation for daily sacrifice called havirdhan, named Kamadhenu because she milks out whatever is desired, and Shurabhi because she is fragrant. Priests of the *Brahman* Doctrine take her for their sacrifices. The next five are crucial to Kshatriyas. First is the vajra of rule, a white horse “of long ears” or “loud neighing” \(*uccaihshravas*\).22 The asura king Bali takes him \(though he will end up in Indra’s court\). Another is the white elephant with four tusks, a descendent of “Possessing Food” \(Iravat\) called Airavata and “Indra of the Invincible” \(Varana-indra\). He is the paradigm for overcoming all obstacles \(*vighna*\).23 Indra takes him, though this telling does not make that explicit. Next appears the lustrous gem called Kaustubha, a chintamani \(gem of thought\): Whatever its possessor remembers, sees, or envisions is obtained through it, and its touch turns metals and stones to gold. Hari takes it as a brilliant jewel for his chest. The coral tree Parijata then emerges, a kamavriksha \(tree of desire\) that gives whatever is wanted. Devas take it to ornament Heaven. Next come the bewitching courtesan dancers called apsarases, whose musicians are the male gandharvas, and they go to Indra’s court. Finally, Goddess Shri appears visibly as Rama the Charming, who is always engrossed in the Bhagavan. As Majesty she bestows all prosperity and wealth on the Bhagavan’s realm, illuminates it in all directions, and entrances everyone.

The devas prepare the unction \(*abhisheka*\) that will complete Rama’s appearance as the mode of majesty \(*shri*\) appropriate to reside on Ajita’s own body. Indra brings the throne, the rivers in their visible forms \(*murti*\) as persons bring the water in golden pitchers, Goddess Earth brings herbs and plants, cows provide five purifying substances, and Spring gives the two spring months Madhu-Madhava.24 Seers use these articles to lay out the ritual space, while gandharvas sing and dance. Mridangas and other drums accompany conches, flutes, and plucked stringed instruments \(*vina*\) in a symphony from the clouds \(*BP* 8.8.8–13\).

Brahmins begin the ceremony with chanting, and then, as Rama the Charming sits enthroned holding a lotus, the elephants of the four directions pour water in the golden pitchers over her. Rama is now truly herself \(*sati*\) as Majesty. Her subjects in the three realms of the bright heavens above, the dark underworlds below, and earth in the middle bring gifts. Ocean gives her yellow silk, Varuna gives her the flower garland signifying victory called Vaijayanti, the prajapati named Vishvakarma gives her ornaments, the Goddess Sarasvati gives her a pearl necklace, and lotus-born Brahma and Nagas give her earrings \(*BP* 8.8.14–16\).

Rama now takes Varuna’s flower garland and arises from her throne to find a husband. No one among the assembled gandharvas, yakshas, asuras, siddhas, charanas, and devas suit her. But \(as if to illustrate *Bhagavad Gita* 18.66\) she believes that “He Gives Emancipation” \(Mukunda\) is free from all desire and will not forsake anyone resigned to him in complete trust. She therefore places the victory garland around Ajita’s neck. He is Majesty’s Favorite or Shrivatsa. In return he gives her his own chest as a place to reside, where she lives as the emblem called Shrivatsa to bring prosperity to all her subjects. Majesty’s gracious glance establishes devas, prajapatis, and their progeny in virtuous conduct \(*shila*\) and other qualities, and gives them supreme repose. But Majesty ignores the asuras. Abandoned by Shri, these descendents of Diti \(*daityas*\) and Danu \(*danavas*\) become impure, voluptuous, undisciplined, and shameless \(*BP* 8.8.17–29\).

Ajita is now inseparably united with Majesty and takes up residence in his palace \(*vimana*\) on White Island. Devas and asuras resume churning through his power \(*bala*\). Two royal drinks now emerge. First this time is Varuna’s virgin daughter named Varuni, who is liquor \(*sura*\). Hari allows the asuras to take her because liquor leads to death \(*mrita*\).25 As *Manu* says, for kings the worst vice resulting from pleasure \(*kama*\) is liquor \(*panam*\), followed in decreasing severity by dice, women, and hunting \(*Manu* 7.44–53\).

Her complement now emerges, the beverage that leads away from death \(*amrita*\). It is contained in a pot held by a person of astounding form, a smaller version of Hari as a dark-colored youth wearing a yellow cloth \(*BP* 8.8.32–33\). His name Dhanvantari \(He Moves in a Curve\) belongs to a deva who receives Vedic oblations in the northeast quarter of sunrise. This Dhanvantari is a portion of Ajita, who himself is a portion of Hari as Pervading Actor, and he emerges here as physician to devas to teach the Knowledge of Longevity \(*ayurveda*\).26 As soon as Dhanvantari appears, however, a shameless asura snatches the pot of amrita out of his hands and flies off with it. The panel depicts this moment.

THE PANEL. The churning paddle Mandara vertically divides this large panel adjacent to the central opening into two parts \(Figure 7.4\). Vasuki as the churning rope divides the western part horizontally and contains his head and tail. Below the naga is the backside of the robust figure of Bali, king of asuras, holding Vasuki just below his five heads. With his back to the viewer, he looks eastward over his left shoulder toward Vishnu propping up Mandara \(Figure 7.5\). Vasuki’s five heads emerge from Bali’s left arm as it grips the snake; all five face Bali as if he is receiving the full force of Vasuki’s hot breath.




FIGURE 7.4. Panel 7: Hari as Ajita churns the Ocean of Milk. Photo by Sathya Seelan.





FIGURE 7.5. Bali holds Vasuki’s five heads \(detail prior to repair\). IFDI.


Above and behind the naga stand three crowned devas facing the viewer as they hold the “rope.” Only their upper bodies are visible \(Figure 7.6\). The central figure must be Indra, for the others stand behind him. His right arm grips the snake from beneath and his hand is visible. He looks eastward toward Mandara and Hari. To his right in the place of honor stands a deva whose left shoulder is concealed by Indra. His right arm wraps over the snake and he faces northward. But he gazes down, as if looking at Vasuki’s head directly beneath him, and at Bali. Above him is the asura with the amrita pot he has just snatched from Dhanvantari. This vertical alignment with asuras and Vasuki identifies him as Varuna, deva emperor of asuras and nagas. The asura’s legs bend in flight westward behind Varuna’s crown, but he faces directly northward and holds the pot at his chest, although the pot is damaged.




FIGURE 7.6. Three devas behind Vasuki, the asura above flies away with the amrita pot \(detail\). IFDI.


To the left of Indra stands an unknown deva, whose right shoulder Indra hides. He grips the snake from beneath and his hand is visible, and peers over Indra’s left shoulder as if straining to see Hari and Mandara.

In the panel’s eastern part stand the royally dressed Ajita, and on a lower level his small portion Dhanvantari. Hari as Ajita has two pairs of arms and stands facing northward in a posture of graceful bends. His stiff right leg and relaxed left leg thrust the weight of his torso westward to keep the churning paddle upright. He tilts his crowned head eastward, rests his front right hand on his eastward-bending hip, and stretches his front left arm up to the top of the churning paddle to keep it in place. His back right arm has broken off, and his back left arm reaches behind the emerging figure of Dhanvantari, but its hand is no longer visible. Dhanvantari, a shorter figure with one pair of arms, faces northward. He stands below Ajita and his crowned head tilting slightly westward reaches the level of Ajita’s shoulder. His hands join at his stomach to hold the amrita pot, which is absent. Vasuki winds around the churning paddle at the level of Dhanvantari’s left shoulder. Above Ajita’s outstretched left arm propping up the paddle are two figures flying away from each other as they look down toward him, both forming the anjalimudra. The figure on the east is Brahma, with two of his four faces visible; his left face has broken off.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel represents the Plower’s transforming power \(*bala*\) acting within the sadhaka’s mind \(*manas*\); the mind is suffused by subject-object consciousness \(*vijnana*\). Through the Vibhava-diksha the acharya infuses the “milk” of mantra into the sadhaka’s mental “ocean,” creating thereby an “Ocean of Milk.” The act of “churning” this Milky Ocean denotes Hari’s action through the mantras applied by the sadhaka in sadhana. As Shuka tells the emperor Parikshit, it is through churning that poets know the atman standing inside their selves \(*BP* 7.1.9\).

Pancharatra texts imply the Vibhava-diksha’s connection to the Churning of the Milk Ocean, but do not state it explicitly. In the *Satvata-samhita* the Plower says that during the preliminary stage of the triad of consecrations, before performing the specific rites that differentiate them, the acharya consecrates the devotee with various mantras. The devotee is then to feel the Bhagavan pervading his or her entire body and is to worship him as the Supporter \(*adhara*\) and the Supported \(*adheya*\) \(*SS* 18.111–160; Smith 1975: 528\). The *Pauskara-samhita* explains that the Supporter’s potency \(*adharashakti*\) manifests itself as Tortoise and as Snake \(*Pauskara-samhita* 22.4–12; Smith 1975: 284\). Here “snake” can refer to Vasuki, to the Plower, or to both. In the same context, the Bhagavan likens his self to an ocean—pure consciousness without ripples; it diversifies by means of manifold powers \(*shakti*\) \(*Pauskara-samhita* 22.54–74; Smith 1975: 284\).

Consecration \(*diksha*\) to the eight-syllable mantra \(*Om namo narayanaya*\) appears to be the means by which Ajita on Vaikuntha enters into the devotee’s mental ocean. \(The Vibhava-diksha is examined at greater length in Appendix 2.\) The human body \(*sharira*, *deha*\) becomes Brahma’s body \(*brahmanda*\) through the consecration, which means that the devas and asuras of the story are within Brahma and the sadhaka simultaneously. Because of Ajita’s mantra presence within his or her mental processes, the sadhaka must maintain a pure, disciplined, and ritualized life of sadhana. By means of it Ajita acts on behalf of his protected “slave” \(*bhagavata*\) by supporting devas over against asuras until the time of life is up and Sadashiva’s kalakuta poison comes into play. This is what the struggle to keep amrita in the hands of devas means for a sadhaka: God’s gracious gift of a prosperous and majestic \(*shrimat*\) life of one hundred years.

This panel illustrates the third stage in the Plower’s indefatigable and transformative power \(*bala*\) moving the sadhaka toward “awakening.” As Natalia R. Lidova explains, it derives from the ancient Vedic rite of making soma, “performed by any householder with his wife” \(Lidova 1994: 132\). The process is recorded in *Rig Veda* 1.28, one of seven attributed to Shunahshepa while tied to the stake as victim in Harischandra’s rajasuya. The householders first pound the soma plants with a stone to release their juices. They position a round post as a pivot, place the churning paddle on it, and wrap a cord around both. They pour the extracted juices into a mortar containing water and other substances, and pull the cord’s two ends back and forth to twirl the paddle and churn the liquid \(described by Wilson 1990: 1, 84\). In the story, Hari as Tortoise is pivot, the ocean is the water in the mortar, the plants from Mount Mandara are the pounded soma as milk,27 and the amrita in Dhanvantari’s pot is the soma purified.

Yet Agama appears to have moved this soma-amrita one step farther from its Vedic origins: The juices of plants put into the ocean to be churned into amrita do not signify soma plants, but mantras imparted to the sadhaka’s consciousness. Kalikanri, we recall, represents the acharya teaching the meaning of the eight-syllable mantra to the “newly born” Nandivarman as a mother nursing her infant for over two hours in the presence of the reclining father. Churning is now the mind’s activation of mantra through predawn repetition called japa. Daily japa performed during the last hour of night over a lifetime, Bhagavatas believe, will produce knowledge, longevity, and prosperity, because these mantras embody Vasudeva’s jnana and transforming bala.

Finally, Mandara, the name of the golden mountain used to churn the Milk Ocean, means “slow,” “sluggish,” and “dull,” an apt description of the sadhaka’s normal mental activity. It is golden because it has been purified and disciplined through refuge in the acharya and his training, but sluggish nevertheless. In the end only Hari as Ajita can empower this sluggish mind by means of japa during Brahma’s hour.

To summaize, then: first, this large panel adjacent to the central window in this northern side signifies the transforming bala of the Plower formation, who is depicted below on the sanctum. Second, it represents the murti Narayana, as does the large panel on the other side of the window. Moreover, this episode, which takes place during the sixth Manu Term, locates Indra’s royal status in Vedic ceremony, a status the asuras continually dispute. Devas and asuras share Kashyapa as their father, but have different mothers. Devas, as beings of brightness, are favored by the Bhagavan, yet asuras as beings of darkness are equally valid and necessary opponents to devas in a universe that is ever changing. Devas and asuras both patronize Brahmins, sponsor Vedic sacrifices addressed to the Bhagavan, God of them all, and both have court priests and acharyas. Yet devas, not asuras, are on the side of humans. People therefore make their offerings to devas led by Indra. Hari churns the Milk Ocean to provide both devas and asuras with requisites of their rule, but favors Indra, even though Bali is the wiser of the two.

This story of the churning of the Milk Ocean derives from the Vedic rite of obtaining pure soma, which is then offered to Indra. The goal of the Vedic ceremony and the goal of the story are the same—to obtain soma/amrita for Indra—but the story derives other essential elements of kingship from the churning. Two liquids emerge from it to frame the episode. The liquid at the beginning, kalakuta, signifies Indra’s death. Shiva keeps it until Indra’s life is to end. The liquid at the end, amrita, signifies Indra’s prosperous longevity. In between Indra’s death and prosperous longevity emerge the essential accoutrements of royal court, which are distributed among all the participants in the churning. These accoutrements reveal the Bhagavata understanding of Indra’s kingship: 1\) His royal status depends on Ajita, for he makes the churning happen. Moreover, Ajita possesses Majesty \(Goddess Shri\) and endless wealth \(the Kaustubha gem\). Whatever majesty and wealth Indra has therefore comes from Ajita. 2\) Indra’s court possesses these essential accoutrements: the white elephant of prosperity, the white horse of victory \(which he will later seize from Bali\), the Parijata tree that grants wishes, and the apsaras dancers and gand-harva musicians who perform in his court. 3\) Indra’s rule is sustained by his patronage of sacrifices performed by Brahmins, who use Kamadhenu’s milk to offer oblations with Hari in mind. 4\) In the end, all that Bali and his asuras have is liquor, which befuddles them and enhances their dark and lustful natures.

Another meaning that emerges is that in the seventh Manu Term there appears on Bharata an “Indra of Men” \(Narendra\). He is “born” through the Vedic rajasuya ceremony. This Indra of Men rules in imitation of the Indra of Devas and creates his court on earth in imitation of Indra’s court in heaven. Like Indra, he keeps in his court a royal horse, a royal elephant, Brahmins and cows, an acharya, and dancers and musicians. But like Bali he also keeps liquor.

Finally, in the context of this northern side of the sanctum, this story represents the royal sadhaka’s mental “churning” of his vijnana consciousness, which has already been infused with the “milk” of mantras during his earlier consecration \(*diksha*\). The act of churning is his japa, the quiet repetition of secret mantras. “The brilliant Primordial Light does not break through for the masses,” Shuka tells Parikshit, “but wise men churn and eventually know the atman established within themselves” \(*BP* 8.1.9\). The entire episode depicts this Bhagavata king’s awareness that his status as an Indra of Men is Hari’s gracious gift; and that Hari and Goddess Shri dwelling in Vaikuntha in the Ocean of Milk is their presence dwelling in his own purified consciousness infused by the “milk” of mantras.




