+++
title = "08 Northern Panels of the Northern Path"

+++

***Fortifying Omniscience***





## **Blazing Omniscient Knowledge**

The first three panels \(5–7\) on the north wall, discussed in the last chapter, represent Hari’s indefatigable churning power \(*bala*\) in the Plower formation; the second three panels \(8–10\), which we will look at here, represent his brilliantly blazing omniscient knowledge \(*jnana*\). The story of Man-as-Lion \(Nrisimha or Narasimha\) is the subject of the first two of these three panels; the third depicts the story of Krishna banishing the snake Kaliya from a Yamuna River pool. The first panel’s location adjacent to the central window, its large size, and its distinctive frame tie it to the preceding panel with the same characteristics. But transformation gives way to purification as we move eastward.



### ***Panel 8: Narasimha Grasps Hiranyakashipu***

### ***Panel 9: Narasimha Rips Open Hiranyakashipu at His Navel***

The Man-lion story depicted by these first two panels refers explicitly to the north-south axis both here on the middle sanctum and below on the vimana. This story, for example, refers to the sage Markandeya, who appears in the second set on the bottom \(Panel N5\). The purana attributed to Markandeya contains the story of Dattatreya \(*MP* 16–44; he appears on the southeast corner facing south \(Panel S1\). As part of this purana, Markandeya tells the “Glorification of the Goddess” \(*Devi Mahatmyam*\) \(*MP* 81–93\), which is about Goddess Chandika Durga, who emanates from Madhusudana; he appears on this sanctum, adjacent to the central window as the murti Madhusudana. Above the window is a small and badly worn sculpted relief showing Goddess Chandika Durga battling the asura Buffalo \(Mahisha\).

Kalikanri also notes this north-south axis in his stanza about these two Man-lion panels: “One day, in the shape of a lion / With nails sharp as diamond, / The Lord fighting the Valorous One / Clawed his waist and tore it open, / And in beautiful Kacci / Encircled by mansions / He has His place, // The Vishnu-house which the Emperor serves, / The Sovereign who rules the Pallavas / In the shade of his White Umbrella / after he raised / the Spear and Banner / of the khatvanga / spine of bones / high above the army” \(*PT* 2.9.6\). This pair of panels here on the north appears in the first half of the stanza; Madhsudana and Goddess Chandika Durga on the south appear in the second half of the stanza. The “spine of bones” carried into battle by Nandivarman’s general was the khatvanga, a scepter shaped like the spinal column and topped by one or more skulls. As we noted in chapter 4, Nandivarman received the khatvanga as a ritual instrument of rule during his unction as Kanchipuram’s Indra of Men about 731.

The khatvanga signifies brilliant conquering power \(*tejas*\) in the extreme. According to the “Glorification of the Goddess,” when Goddess Chandika Durga knits her eyebrows in wrath, Goddess Kali emerges from them. Goddess Kali wears a garland of humanlike heads and carries a sword, a noose and, notably, the khatvanga \(*Devi Mahatmyam* 7.5–6\). Kalikanri says in the poem that \(by means of his general Udayachandra\) Nandivarman raised the khatvanga “high above the army” during battle. This appears to denote a rite to invoke Durga’s tejas in its most intensely wrathful mode against his “asura” enemies supported by the Pandyan at Madurai.

The lion as Goddess Chandika Durga’s mount \(*vahana*\) represents her, just as the khatvanga represents Goddess Kali. Durga’s mount denotes wrathful tejas. The Pallavas used the lion as their protecting emblem throughout their realm, and in this Vishnu-house it appears frequently on the prakara walkway, the porch, and the vimana \(Figures I.5, 4.1\). Her lion literally embodies her tejas. We shall return to Durga and her lion later.

In this pair of panels facing north, the lion appears as a man. The man-as-lion refers to two aspects of Narayana’s grace: the human shape denotes the acharya; the lion shape represents jnana’s blazing tejas in the acharya. This tejas within the acharya purifies the sadhaka through two different consecrations and their sadhanas. The first is the Narasimha-diksha, which requires daily rites for Man-lion and qualifies anyone to receive the Vibhava-diksha, which we know Nandivarman received. The second is the Vyuha-diksha illustrated here, which Nandivarman did not receive, because its sadhana is incompatible with active rule. The Vyuha-diksha produces a sadhana of two sequential stages employing a single material form \(*ekamurti*\) and a wheel of colors and letters \(*varnachakra*\). The sadhana’s first stage relates to deep sleep \(*sushupti*\) and its second to dreaming \(*svapna*\). \(Waking—*jagrat*—appears in the third consecration and the next panel.\) A twofold teaching belonging to the *Atharva Veda* matches this twofold sadhana. It is “The Secret Teaching about Man-lion’s Burning” \(*Nrisimha-tapaniya Upanishad*\) consisting of prior \(*purva*\) and latter \(*uttara*\) portions \(Deussen 1980 2: 809–861\). \(The three dikshas are discussed at greater length in Appendix 2.\) The climax of the Man-lion story similarly consists of penultimate and ultimate events. This double structure of sadhana, secret teaching, and story explains why paired panels depict the Man-lion story here and elsewhere in temples of the period.1

NARRATIVE FRAMES. The *Bhagavata Purana* tells the Man-lion story at great length and uses the device of literary framing to do so \(*BP* 7.1–10\). It places stories inside other stories to create narrative boxes that illuminate each other, at times with humor and irony. Other teachings in the *Bhagavata Purana* also use this ancient literary technique, but we shall limit our exploration of it to this single, if lengthy, case. The structure of the narration is diagramed in Figure 8.1.




FIGURE 8.1. Visual representation of narrative frames. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.


This story uses five narrative frames to discuss the bipartite process of birth and death in the terms of the richly complex tripartite process \(*triguna*\) of matter, which G. J. Larson places at the heart of the samkhya doctrine of the three gunas or threads \(Larson and Bhattacharya 1987: 65–73\). The threads, of course, are clarity \(*sattva*\), passion \(*rajas*\), and ignorance \(*tamas*\). God weaves both cosmos and person out of them and follows the same pattern for both, but turns the person inside out, as we shall discuss in the introduction to part III. This tripartite process also reveals unexpected complexity in other dyads, such as good and bad, knowledge and ignorance, and the righteous and the wicked.

These panels depict omniscience purifying a sadhaka split between a newly born delight \(*prahlada*\) in Krishna and a mature ego focused on itself as “This am I.” If unchecked by wisdom and submission to an acharya’s discipline, the sadhaka may visualize sensual objects. Passion from the thread of rajas will then produce clinging \(*sanga*\). From it will arise greed \(*lobha*\), leading to desire \(*kama*\) and anger \(*krodha*\), and they may lead him to employ mantra and ritual for goals opposed to his young delight in Krishna.2 The Man-lion story vividly illustrates the problem and its solution.

The scene in this first panel of the pair is the climactic moment just before Man-as-lion rips apart the asura king Hiranyakashipu \(Golden Clothes\), who has taken over Indra’s throne in the east \(*BP* 7.8.26\). The next panel portrays his slaughter. In both cases the viewer stands in the place of Delight or Prahlada watching his father’s destruction. Man-lion destroys Hiranyakashipu in the assembly hall of Indra’s palace, which is east of great Meru on the Manasottara \(Beyond the Mind\) mountain range on the circular continent called Pushkara \(Blue Lotus Flower\) \(*BP* 5.21.7\). This means that in Brahma’s macrocosmic body, the slaughter takes place at the outermost boundary of his subtle body and mental processes, at the very edge of spacetime. In the sadhaka’s microcosmic body, this slaughter analogously takes place at the innermost edge of mental processes deep within.3

FRAME 1. SUTA TEACHES SHAUNAKA AND OTHER SEERS. After the Kali Yuga begins, Brahmin seers at a Vaishnava center in the Naimisha forest perform a thousand-year sattra ceremony for the sake of gaining heaven. They are led by Shaunaka, master of the Rig Veda \(BP 1.1.4\). Also there is the charioteer \(*suta*\) named Ugrashrava, son of Romaharshana and a disciple of Vyasa. From his father he had learned ancient lore \(*purana*\), history \(*itihasa*\), and the system of right order \(*dharmashastra*\). During a break, the seers ask the suta to tell them the “pure Bhagavata story” \(BP 1.4.2\). Why did the Bhagavan take birth through Vasudeva’s wife Devaki as the master of the Satvatas? What did he and Balarama do? How has the right order been supported since they left earth? \(BP 1.1.1–23\). Shaunaka says that if the Krishna story \(*Krishnakatha*\) is long it does not matter, because blessed Death has been invoked in the sacrifice and is present; he can listen with everyone else and no one is likely to die \(BP 1.16.5–8\).

The charioteer then venerates the teacher known as Shuka \(Parrot\) and explains that they seek the essence contained in the purana with the name *Bhagavatam*, which Shuka taught the emperor Parikshit.

FRAME 2. SHUKA TEACHES PARIKSHIT THE ORIGIN OF THE *BHAGAVATAM*. This teaching has a long lineage. Brahma learns it at the beginning of his kalpa. While practicing tapas he receives the vision of the Bhagavan Hari and prostrates before him. Hari teaches him supremely secret knowledge about himself \(*BP* 2.9.30\). Hari’s shape \(*rupa*\) vanishes, Brahma venerates, and then he emanates spacetime and teaches his son Narada what Hari had taught him, the “*Bhagavata Purana* of ten characterises” \(*BP* 2.9.42–43\).

In the meantime, Vyasa \(Compiler\), who had been born in the previous Dvapara Yuga as a part \(*kala*\) of Hari, is sitting alone on the bank of the Sarasvati River in distress. He remembers that he had re-edited the Veda because the Kali Yuga was approaching, and had composed the *Mahabharata* as a way to make Veda available to everyone—because women, Shudras, and degenerates of the twice-born ritual classes may not hear Veda. But he had unfortunately not included the Bhagavata Dharma in any of this \(*BP* 1.4.14, 24–29; 1.5.31\). Narada suddenly arrives and tells Vyasa to enter samadhi, where he will learn the Krishna story and then tell it to others. Afer Narada leaves, Vyasa goes to an ashram at Shamyaprasa on the western bank of the Saravati River, where he sits and enters samadhi. While he is visualizing the supreme *brahman* Narada teaches him the *Bhagavata Purana* of ten characteristics. Afterward he composes the *Satvata-samhita*, which he later revises and teaches to his son Shuka as the *Bhagavata-samhita*, and Shuka now teaches it to Parikshit \(*BP* 1.5.13; 2.9.43; 1.7.1–8\).

\(BACK TO\) FRAME 1. SUTA TEACHES THE SAGES ABOUT PARIKSHIT AND SHUKA. The seers inquire about Parikshit’s career, and Suta describes at length the events that led to his death early in the Kali Yuga. Parikshit was a disciple of Shuka. He performed three horse sacrifices on the southern bank of the Ganga River, but because Krishna and Balarama were gone from earth, the asura Kali was distintegrating dharma and Vedic sacrifices, just like a Shudra with no respect for Brahmins who pretends to be a Kshatriya \(*BP* 1.16.2–4\). Parikshit defeated him and forbade him from entering Brahmavarta; dharma flourished there and sacrifices were made to Hari, the Ruler of Sacrifices whose material form is sacrifice. Nevertheless, he gave Kali five places to dwell: wherever gambling, drinking liquor, debauchery, and slaughter take place, and in gold \(*BP* 1.17.38–41\). Parikshit’s prowess then is what allows Shaunaka and the other seers to perform this sattra of a thousand years now \(*BP* 1.17.45\). The sages ask Suta what the great Bhagavata Parikshit learned from Shuka that led him to Hari’s feet, and Suta answers by telling them the cause of Parikshit’s imminent death: He allegedly humiliated an Angirasa Brahmin seer.

One day while hunting, Parikshit becomes extremely hungry and thirsty. He comes upon a Brahmin seer in the line of Angiras deep in samadhi. He asks for water and when the seer does not respond he becomes irrationally angry. To test whether the Brahmin is truly in samadhi or merely showing contempt toward a Kshatriya, Parikshit picks up a dead snake with his bow and places it around the sage’s neck. He then returns to his capital \(*BP* 1.18.1–3, 16–17, 24–31\).

When the sage’s son learns that his father sits in samadhi in a humiliated condition, he assumes a Kshatriya must have put the snake there, and he immediately curses whoever humiliated his father to be bitten in seven days by the deadly snake Takshaka \(Cutter\). When he finally reaches his father, he cries out in horror at what he sees and his cry brings his father out of trance. The seer sees the dead snake around his neck and, with supreme indifference, throws it away. But when he asks his son why he weeps and hears of the curse, he chastises him for inflicting a major punishment for a minor offence. A king is not an ordinary man, he says, but is a man as deva. Without his tejas, disorder \(*adharma*\) will destroy the noble order \(*aryadharma*\) of ritual class, stage of life, and disciplined behavior \(*varnashrama-achara*\). People will become as promiscuous as dogs and monkeys \(*BP* 1.18.32–50\).

In the meantime, Parikshit repents of his deed and learns of the curse. He resolves to purify himself by fasting to death with his mind focused on Krishna. He turns his empire over to his son Janamejaya, goes to the Ganga’s south bank, and sits down facing north on a bed of kusha grass with the tips facing east. Devas pour flowers on him, and seers gather around to support him. When Parikshit asks them what he should do now that death is imminent, Vyasa’s son Shuka appears on the scene; he looks to be about sixteen years old, has dark skin, and is totally naked, because he is an avadhuta, a radical ascetic freed of all desire. Parikshit bows to him and asks what he should do while he awaits death. Shuka’s answer is to tell him the *Bhagavata Purana* he had learned from his father Vyasa near the end of the Dvapara Yuga \(*BP* 1.19.1–7, 17, 25–28; 2.1.8\).

\(BACK TO\) FRAME 2. SHUKA TEACHES PARIKSHIT THE *BHAGAVATAM*. Shuka begins by teaching the great value of chanting Hari’s names. He tells Parikshit he has only seven days to live and to use them practicing yoga, which he describes in detail. It begins with visualizing the Bhagavan’s grossly material shape \(*sthula rupa*\) of seven sheaths \(*kosha*\). It moves on to fixed concentration \(*dharana*\) on the Person born in the womb of primordial matter called *viraj*.4 This Person \(who is Narayana reclining in the dark waters\) permeates the gross shape and is the true Bhagavan, the Supreme Person as the first avatara, Aniruddha the Unobstructed from whom everything emerges, including the avataras of play \(*lila-avatara*\) \(*BP* 2.1.14, 22–25. 2.7.41, 45\).

Shuka teaches at great length \(*BP* 2.7–7.1\). Eventually Parikshit poses a question. He has heard stories of the Bhagavan assisting Indra in his battle with the asura named Vritra \(Restrainer\), and wonders how he can fight asuras on behalf of devas when he is friend to everyone. He transcends matter’s material threads, so why would he oppose asuras and fear them? The question is important, Shuka says, because its answer reveals Hari’s wondrous story and his devotees’ greatness. Hari uses his maya “to appear in the condition of both the oppressed and the oppressor.” Through maya he activates matter’s threads and weaves them in patterns that chastise those who should be chastised. When purity \(*sattva*\) dominates the pattern, he intensifies the power of devas and seers and impels it to make bodies for him to enjoy. When passion \(*rajas*\) dominates, he intensifies the power of asuras and impels it to create bodies for souls to enjoy. When darkness \(*tamas*\) dominates, he intensifies the power of yakshas and rakshasas and impels it for his sleep. All of this happens according to his movement as Time \(*BP* 7.1.1–11\).

To illustrate this teaching, Shuka tells Parikshit the old legend \(*purva itihasa*\) Narada once told to Yudhisthira at his rajasuya.

FRAME 3. NARADA TELLS YUDHISHTHIRA THE STORY OF HIRANYAKASHIPU. Yudhishthira performs the rajasuya according to the instructions Varuna gave Harishchandra \(*BP* 10.74\). During its soma offering, Yudhishthira venerates Krishna as Ruler of Senses and honored guest. Shishupala stands up to refute him; after much commotion Krishna slices off Shishupala’s head with his wheel. But then, as everyone watches in astonishment, Shishupala’s soul enters into Krishna in the emancipation known as “yoking with God” \(*sayujya*\) \(*BP* 7.1.12–47\).5 When Yudhisthira wonders why his maternal cousins merge with Krishna, Narada explains by describing “This am I,” and telling the ancient legend \(*purva itihasa*\) of Hiranyakashipu.

“This am I,” Narada says, arises within consciousness when awareness as a person \(*purusha*\) is confused with matter \(*prakriti*\). This confusion produces the awareness of oneself as one’s material body. Thereafter, “This am I” perceives dualities and experiences injury, insult, and death as violence \(*himsa*\). But the Bhagavan feels no such injury, insult, or death because he is beyond matter and contains it. He punishes persons for their own good, not because he seeks them harm \(*himsa*\). It is important to concentrate on him continuously for whatever reason \(*BP* 7.1.22–25\). Shishupala and Dantavaktra, for example, demonstrate that antagonism \(*dvesha*\) toward the Bhagavan is an excellent means to concentrate the mind \(*manas*\), better than the discipline of sharing in him \(*bhaktiyoga*\). The gopis attained Vasudeva through erotic desire \(*kama*\), Kamsa through fear \(*bhaya*\), Shishupala and other kings through hatred \(*dvesha*\), the Vrishnis through kinship \(*sambandha*\), “you Pandavas” through affection \(*sneha*\), and “we seers” through devout sharing \(*bhakti*\).

The reason Shishupala and Dantavaktra hated Krishna, Narada continues, is because of their previous lives. They originally dwelled in Vishnu’s realm \(*vishnupada*\), but were cursed by sages \(*vipra*\) and fell from it. How can Hari’s slaves \(*haridasa*\) devoted exclusively to him be expelled from Vaikuntha City, Yudhishthira asks, for they have no physical body \(*deha*\), no sense organs, and no vital breaths? Why would they be connected to a body in this realm of death and birth \(*BP* 7.1.30–34\)? Narada answers by briefly telling the story of two attendants in Vishnu’s Realm named Jaya \(Victory\) and Vijaya \(Conquest\).

Brahma has four sons born of his mind, named Sanaka \(Ancient\), Sanandana \(Joyful\), Sanatana \(Eternal\), and Sanatkumara \(Ever Young\). One day they go to Vaikuntha City and encounter Jaya and Vijaya standing guard at its entrance. Brahma’s sons are nude and look like children, and the guards make fun of them. This disrespect, of course, elicits Vasudeva’s judgment and he gives them a choice of punishments; they choose to be born into samsara three times in a row as brothers opposed to Vishnu. Jaya the elder is born therefore as the asura named Hiranyakashipu \(Golden Clothes\) and Vijaya the younger as Hiranyaksha \(Golden Eyes\). Hari kills Hirianyaksha when he takes the shape of a boar, and later kills Hiranyakashipu when he takes the shape of a lion. Jaya and Vijaya are born next as the rakshasa brothers named Ravana \(Cry Causer\) and Kumbhakarna \(Pot Ears\). Hari kills them when he is the hero Rama in the Raghu Dynasty. Narada tells Yudhishthira that the sage Markandeya will tell him that story, which he does in the *Mahabharata* as the *Ramayana* \(*Mahabharata* 3.257–275; van Buitenen 2: 723–760\). The brothers are finally born as Yudhishthira’s maternal cousins; Jaya is Shishupala \(Child Protector\) and and Vijaya is Dantavaktra \(Crooked Tusk\). Krishna slays Shishupala with his wheel and Dantavaktra with his mace, and this time they dissolve into him, the Unfallen \(*achyuta*\), and resume their positions at the entrance to Vaikuntha City \(*BP* 7.1.39–46\).

Yudhishthira is intrigued about about Jaya’s first birth as the asura Hiranyakashipu and asks Narada to tell him more:

After Hiriyanaksha dies at the hands of Boar, Hiranyakashipu is so grief stricken and angry that he vows to kill Vishnu, whose death will kill devas, he thinks, because Vishnu is their life-breath. He vows to pierce Hari’s neck with his trident and use his blood to offer libations for his dead brother.6 Hiranyakashipu sends asuras to earth to attack Brahmins and Kshatriyas and wipe out Vedic sacrifices and rites, which are Vishnu’s roots and sustenance \(*BP* 7.2.9–11\). He charges them to burn up all villages and towns, cut down all trees, and destroy all vegetation. The asuras do so. Under assault and weakened from the lack of the oblations that sustain them, devas leave heaven and wander earth in disguise.

Hiranyakashipu performs the funeral ceremonies for his brother. His mother, Diti, and his brother’s wives and children are grieving, of course, and he uses the dharma of warriors to console them. He explains it through “analytical reasoning” \(*samkhya*\), the doctrine that accompanies the practice of “yoking together” \(*yoga*\) body, mind, and speech in the search for the true self. The hero who dies in battle, he says, is not to be mourned, because all beings live in this world like travelers; they gather at a watershed to drink and then go their own ways; fate \(*daiva*\) uses karma to determine their journeys. It is true that the eternal Self or atman is unchanging, pure, omnipresent, and omniscient, but its proximity to distilled mental activity causes distilled matter to weave a subtle body \(*linga*\) of material threads \(*guna*\).7 These threads impel mental activity to perceive the atman’s pure and disembodied consciousness as a person \(*puman*\) with a body. This person clings to whatever is pleasing, rejects whatever is displeasing, and lives because of its acts propelled by desire. His action produces and destroys, and its maya creates sorrow, memory of various matters, nondiscrimination and anxious thought, and even discrimination in what is misunderstood \(*BP* 7.2.21–26\). Hiranyakashipu illustrates all of this with the ancient legend of Yama deva teaching the widows of the king of Ushinara named Suyajna \(Auspicious Sacrifice\).

FRAME 4. HIRANYAKASHIPU TELLS HIS MOTHER DITI THE STORY OF YAMA AND THE WIDOWS. King Suyajna of Ushinara lies dead on a battlefield, his heart pierced by an arrow. His mourning wives hold the corpse and long to go with him; once he brought them pleasure, but now he brings only sorrow. The sun begins to set, but they will not release the corpse for cremation. Yama deva, Master of the Dead, is Dharma itself and must keep death and birth in their proper order \(*dharma*\). To persuade them to let go of the corpse, he approaches them in the form of a boy. “I am amazed at my elders’ delusion \(*moha*\),” he says, “because you mourn for someone who has gone where you will go too.”

The Ruler \(*isha*\), Yama tells them, emits, sustains, and destroys the universe as his own play \(*krida*\). Over time material beings \(*bhutani*\) come and go according to karma. “The living king who once responded to you is not this corpse,” he says. “It is a material body \(*sharira*\) born of delusion \(*mohaja*\) for the person of awareness \(*purusha*\). The man \(*puman*\) you perceived as king and husband stood apart from his body’s material threads as he acted through them.”

As the boy explains, the tejas of the omnipresent \(*vibhu*\) produces and rejects gross and subtle bodies composed of elements, sense organs, and mind. Only the atman is permanent, all else is transitory. Those who know this do not grieve, because grief cannot change the nature \(*svabhava*\) of anything \(*BP* 7.2.27–49\). He tells the story of the hunter and the shrikes \(*kulinga*\) to make his point.

FRAME 5. YAMA TELLS THE STORY OF THE SHRIKES AND THE HUNTER. One day a hunter spreads his net in the forest to catch birds and hides behind a tree. He entices a pair of fork-tailed shrikes \(*kulinga*\), and the female becomes entangled in his net. Out of his loving attachment \(*sneha*\) to her, the male laments piteously; he is sorry for her and for himself, because the loss of her is the loss of half his self, and he anguishes over his chicks expecting their mother. But as he is grieving, Time \(*kala*\) prompts the hunter hiding behind the tree to shoot and kill him.8

\(BACK TO\) FRAME 4. HIRANYAKASHIPU AGAIN TALKS TO HIS MOTHER DITI. Hiranyakashipu resumes his story of Yama and the widows. “You are like the kulinga bird in your foolish grief,” Yama tells them. “You may mourn for a hundred years but will achieve nothing.” Suyajna’s wives now understand that everything is impermanent and propelled by Time, and Yama disappears. They let go of their husband’s corpse and his relatives perform the cremation rites \(*BP* 7.2.57–59\).

\(BACK TO\) FRAME 3. NARADA TELLS YUDHISTHIRA THE STORY OF HIRANYAKASHIPU. We again hear Narada’s voice, telling Yudhisthira the story of Hiranyakashipu. He reports that Hiranyakashipu told his mother and sisters-inlaw: “Therefore, don’t grieve for yourselves or for others. After all, when the sense of distinction vanishes, who then is oneself and who is the other? What is one’s own and what is another’s?” Diti and her daughters-in-law stop grieving \(*BP* 7.2.58–61\).

When the funeral rites are over, Narada continues, Hiranyakashipu sets out to use yoga to make himself the invincible, deathless, and ever-youthful sovereign of the world. He begins the most austere modes of ascetic practice \(*tapas*\) in the valley of the mountain called Mandara \(Sluggish\), before it is used to churn the Milk Ocean. He holds up his hands, stands on his toes, and gazes at the stars to bring Brahma down from the peak of spacetime in Realm of True Being \(*satyaloka*\). Ants eat his body and envelop it with their hills sprouting grass and reeds. Devas eventually urge Brahma to respond. He appears before the anthill hidden by grass and reeds, tells Hiranyakashipu he may have whatever he wants, and sprinkles the hill with water from his pot. The asura instantly emerges as a young man with a body hard as diamond \(*vajra*\) and a golden glow. Hiranyakashipu now matches his name, Golden Clothes.

The newly born asura falls at Brahma’s feet and praises him at length as the Golden Embryo \(Hiranyagarbha\), whose body is transcendent, subtle, and gross. Hiranyakashipu then asks for a very rich gift: None of Brahma’s creatures shall be able to kill him by day or night, on earth or in sky, or as man or animal; no weapon shall harm him, nor anything with or without life; he shall not be killed by deva, asura, or snake, nor in battle; he shall be made emperor of all the worlds with the imperishable fame and splendor of Brahma and the world-protectors obtained by great people through tapas and yoga. Amazingly, Brahma gives it all. Hiranyakashipu is now the greatest of all perfected \(*siddha*\) practitioners of yoga and intends to use his perfection to live forever \(*BP* 7.3\).

With renewed strength and a diamond-hard body shining like gold, Hiranyakashipu sets out to avenge his brother by attacking Vishnu. He brings all three worlds under control and assumes the role of the world-guardians. He controls all beings—devas, asuras, and humans; he moves into Indra’s palace, where everyone waits on him except Narayana’s three material forms \(*trimurti*\) as Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. Even though his eyes are red from drink, his tapas and yoga keep his body strong and senses and mind firm.

Heaven and earth pour wealth and pleasure on Hiranyakashipu, but he is not satisfied; satisfaction arises only when the senses are properly controlled, and his are not because he indulges in all manner of pleasure. Intoxicated by this sovereignty and in violation of the shastras, he goes on for a very long time in this arrogant living and incurs Brahma’s curse. The unnerved guardians of the world go for refuge to the Unfallen. A voice responds, “When Hiranyakashipu persecutes his son Prahlada, Hari will destroy him” \(*BP* 7.4.21–28\).

Among Hiranyakashipu’s four sons, Prahlada, which means delight, is noted for his excellent qualities. He is an asura, but does not act like one. Krishna identifies with him because he is “delight in Krishna” \(*BP* 7.4.30–43; *BG* 10.30\). At times, however, this delightful boy behaves oddly. As a child he had seemed stupid because the grasping Krishna caught hold of his atman, and in Govinda’s embrace toys are of no interest. He did not know the world around him, nor did he know when he sat, walked, ate, drank, or lay down. Sometimes he wept, sometimes he laughed, sometimes he sang, sometimes he shouted, sometimes he danced, and sometimes he imitated Krishna’s deeds. At other times Govinda’s touch made him speechless; his hair would stand on end and tears would fall from his half-closed eyes. He served Krishna’s feet and spent time with people freed of possessions and was supremely tranquil in his self. Because of this he would bring equanimity \(*sama*\) to people of bad inclinations \(*dushana*\) \(*BP* 7.4.42\).

Hiranyakashipu’s domestic priest \(*purohita*\) is Shukra \(Bright\), who will also serve his great-grandson Bali. Shukra has two sons, Shanda and Amarka, and they are put in charge of Prahlada’s education. He listens, but thinks what they teach is not good because they say that the distinction between oneself and another is true \(*BP* 7.5.3\). One day Hiranyakashipu takes his delightful son on his lap and asks, “What do you think is good \(*sadhu*\)?” Prahlada answers that “I” and “Mine” harass embodied beings incessantly and so it is good to renounce the household and enter the forest to take refuge with Hari. The king laughs. He thinks someone has perverted his son’s mind and warns his teachers to keep away Vishnu’s Brahmin partisans.

Prahlada returns to Shanda and Amarka, and they ask him how he learned things alien to boys. The Bhagavan causes one to see the distinction between oneself and another, he answers, but he had erased that misperception in him. Now, just as a piece of iron in the presence of a magnet automatically moves toward it, his consciousness \(*chetas*\) automatically moves toward the Bhagavan holding the wheel \(*BP* 7.5.11–14\). The alarmed teachers and send for a whipping rod. Prahlada, they say, “is the thorn bush born in this sandalwood forest of Diti’s sons; Vishnu’s axe uproots its root and uses the little boy as its handle” \(*BP* 7.5.17\). They teach him carefully, only about human life’s three goals of righteousness \(*dharma*\), prosperity \(*artha*\), and pleasure \(*kama*\), and nothing at all about emancipation from it all \(*moksha*\) as the fourth.

Hiranyakashipu again sends for his delightful son, takes him on his lap, and asks, “Among the lessons you’ve learned so far, which are the best?” “They are the nine elements of devotion to Vishnu,” he answers, “which are hearing and singing about him, remembering his feet and serving them, paying him homage, venerating him, working for him, being a friend to him, and surrendering to him. I think they are the best lesson I have learned.” His father is furious. The teachers deny having taught him any such ideas, and he asks his son where he got them. Prahlada answers that firm devotion to Krishna and inner perception of Vishnu come only through “unction with the dust of the feet” of those who possess nothing but him \(*BP* 7.5.19–24, 30–32\).

The enraged king shoves his son off his lap and orders his rakshasa guards to kill him \(*BP* 7.5.33–41\). “Prahlada wants to serve Vishnu, who killed my brother who was like his father\! He can’t be trusted. What use even to Vishnu will be a five-year-old who throws away inviolate affection for his own parents? He’s like a diseased limb, he must be cut off and thrown away before he infects the whole body.”9 The rakshasas begin shouting “pierce” and “cut” and stab at Prahlada with their tridents, but his mind is absorbed in the supreme *brahman*, the Bhagavan who is the Self of all, and nothing harms him. Hiranyakashipu anxiously tries other ways to kill his delightful son. He uses trampling elephants, snakebites, and rites of black magic. He rolls him down a mountain, imprisons him, poisons him, and starves him. He exposes him to bad weather, fire, storm, and water. Yet nothing works. Hiranyakashipu is perplexed and worried. “This boy is like Shunahshepa and will not forget what I have done. Will he cause my death?” \(*BP* 7.5.45–47\).

Shanda and Amarka still think their student can be educated, and to keep him from running away until Shukra returns, they suggest tying him down with Varuna’s rope \(as his grandson Bali will be\). Hiranyakashipu agrees and tells them to teach the restrained Prahlada only about the duty of kings and householders. But Prahlada still thinks these subjects are worthless. Whenever Shanda and Amarka leave the room, their students ask Prahlada to play, and usually he mentions the sorry nature of the worldly life and declines. But he is compassionate and friendly, and one day the others gather around him to hear what he has to say.

FRAME 4. PRAHLADA TEACHES THE ASURA STUDENTS. Prahlada tells them that the wise man should practice Bhagavata Dharma from childhood because human birth is rare and uncertain.10 A man lives at most one hundred years, and half of it he sleeps through as if a corpse. He spends the first twenty years of the other half in childish ignorance and youthful play, and the last twenty years in aging degeneration. In between, desire \(*kama*\) and infatuation \(*moha*\) attach him to the householder’s life, and his progeny tie him down as if he is a pet monkey kept on a leash by a lustful woman. The only way to escape is through Narayana the primordial God, the Unfallen present everywhere as all things and no thing. Give up your asura nature, he says, and show compassion \(*daya*\) toward all beings. Be sympathetic and friendly and kind to all, for that pleases God, and if you please God, what’s out of reach \(*BP* 7.6.1–25\)? Yet those who truly sing the glory of God’s feet do not want to gain anything—not righteousness or even emancipation. The Veda may teach righteousness, prosperity, and pleasure, but its true meaning is dedication of the center of one’s consciousness to the Supreme Person. Narayana was himself once a man and taught this Bhagavata Dharma to Narada. “I learned it from Narada” \(*BP* 7.6.23–28\). \(Narayana as a man teaching Narada is depicted below in Panel N2.\)

The puzzled students ask how that can be. Only Shukra’s sons have taught us, they say. When you were little and lived in the women’s quarters you couldn’t have have spent time with such a great soul. What do you mean?

Prahlada tells them that when his father went to the sluggish Mount Mandara to perform tapas, Indra led devas in an attack on asuras and they fled. “Indra captured my mother, who was pregnant with me. Indra was leading her away when Narada appeared and urged him to release her because she was innocent. Indra said he would, but only after I had been born and killed. Narada told him that I would be sinless and great among the Bhagavan’s great slaves, and this persuaded Indra. He immediately let my mother go, circumambulated her because she was carrying me, and returned home. Narada took my mother to his ashram and she stayed there until my father returned from his great tapas. Narada taught her, but had me in mind as his pupil. My mother later forgot the lessons, but I always remember what I heard while in her womb. Let me tell you what I learned” \(paraphrased from *BP* 7.7.1–16\).

FRAME 5. NARADA TEACHES PRAHLADA IN THE WOMB. Prahlada outlines the topics as if for a course of study.11 “While I was in the womb I heard Narada say that there are six actions of Time on the body and twelve characteristics of the Self \(*atman*\). Matter is eightfold, with three threads and sixteen evolutes, and the person of consciousness \(*purusha*\) watches them. There are bodies that move and do not move, and there are three modifications of the intellect \(*buddhi*\) in waking, dreaming, and deep sleep. But these modifications occur because of intentional actions \(*karma*\) and ever-moving matter \(*prakriti*\), not because of the Supreme Person who pervades them all. Ignorance \(*ajnana*\) falsely identifies the person of pure consciousness with these modifications of the intellect; and this false identification produces the realm of death and birth \(*samsara*\), which is insubstantial like a dream. Ignorance is the seed of intentional action and must be destroyed through the unification of consciousness \(*yoga*\), because yoga ends the flow of thought” \(paraphrased from *BP* 7.7.18–28\).

Of the thousands of ways to end the flow of thought, he went on, the easiest is the way of the “good person” \(*sadhu*\), a means the Bhagavan himself teaches. The devotee who follows this path gives devout service to the guru, offers all possessions to God, and associates closely with devotees who are good \(*sadhu*\). He worships Hari, has faith in his stories, and sings of his qualities and acts. He visualizes his lotus feet to see and venerate his bodies \(*linga*\). He believes that Hari resides as Ruler in all beings, regards all beings as good \(*sadhu*\), and gives them whatever they desire.

People may easily begin with the “means of one thousand names” \(*upayasahasranamya*\), a readily available recitation that leads to other means and to intense pleasure \(*rati*\) in Vasudeva. This intense pleasure \(*rati*\) eventually leads to “extingushing in *brahman*” \(*brahmanirvana*\). Its happiness \(*shukha*\) may manifest itself vividly in bizarre social behavior, of course, but the devotee is unconcerned with what the world thinks. With single-minded devotion \(*bhakti*\) he should therefore worship the Ruler who is beyond any fault either seen or heard \(*BP* 7.7.29–37\).

FRAME 4. PRAHLADA TEACHES THE ASURA STUDENTS. After this summary of Narada’s lessions, Prahlada tells the gathered asura boys that Hari is the Ruler and the Beloved \(*priya*\) of all Selves, whom he embodies with himself. Anyone may be blessed by worshiping the feet of the Giver of Emancipation \(Mukunda\), whether deva, asura, or human, or even yaksha or gandharva. The highest goal in this world is singular and devout participation \(*ekantabhakti*\) in Govinda seen everywhere \(*BP* 7.7.38–55\).

FRAME 3. NARADA TELLS YUDHISHTHIRA THE STORY OF HIRANYAKASHIPU. We return to Narada’s narrative at the rajasuya: a few days later Shanda and Amarka note that their innately passionate and deluded students are intently reflective, a rather unusual change, and they tell the king. Trembling with violent rage at his son’s behavior, Hiranyakashipu resolves to kill Prahlada and sends for him. Prahlada appears and respectfully stands before his father, who hisses like a snake, “How dare you flout me\! Where do you get such audacity?” Prahlada respectfully replies, “It comes from the Bhagavan, because he controls all things as his slaves, from Brahma’s realm at the top of the universe all the way down to its bottom.” Prahlada pleads with his father to give up his asura nature, because an uncontrolled mind gone astray is the only enemy. Supreme worship of the Bhagavan requires an even and undisturbed mind that perceives no difference between friend and foe. “Some think themselves the conqueror of the ten directions, yet have not even conquered the six enemies within, which are their own five senses and mind” \(*BP* 7.8.11\). Delight in Krishna could not have pierced his father’s heart more skillfully.

Hiranyakashipu is beside himself with rage. “Where is this Ruler of the moving universe you’re always talking about?” he roars. “Everywhere,” Prah-lada replies quietly. “He’s in this pillar then?” “Yes, he’s there, I see him.” “I’m going to cut off your prattling head\!” he father screams. “If Hari’s your shelter, let *him* protect you if he can.” Hiranyakashipu grabs his sword, leaps off the throne, and pounds his fist on the pillar where his son says he sees Hari. Suddenly a terrifying sound loud enough to crack Brahma’s sphere thunders, and when Hiranyakashipu looks around to see where it comes from, he sees something that is neither a wild animal nor a human emerge out of the pillar he struck. It is the Indra of men and of wild animals in a single shape, it is a “a lion as man,” it is the Man-lion \(Narasimha\) \(*BP* 7.8.18–22\).

Hiranyakashipu grabs his mace and rushes at this strange form, and Prahlada watches his father disappear into Narasimha’s blaze, just as a moth disappears in a flame. The invincible asura brings his mace down to crush Narasimha with his great strength, but Narasimha seizes him in his claws the way Garuda seizes a snake. He holds him in his blaze and then lets him go. Hiranyakashipu attacks again, this time with his sword and shield, and Narasimha seizes him again, but this time holds him fast \(*BP* 7.8.27\).

THE PANEL. These two sculpted panels \(Figures 8.2 and 8.3\) illustrate the two events of the story’s climax, and in both cases the viewer stands in the place of Prahlada.




FIGURE 8.2. Panel 8: Narasimha grasps Hiranyakashipu. Photo by Sathya Sedan.





FIGURE 8.3. Panel 9: Narasimha rips open Hiranyakashipu at his navel. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


The first and larger panel portrays the moment Narasimha grasps Hiranyakashipu and holds him in his blazing light \(Figure 8.4\). Narasimha at the center of the panel holds Hiranyakashipu in a posture of graceful violence. The two figures are almost equal in size and posture, and move toward and away from each other simultaneously, but Narasimha has eight arms and Hiranyakashipu has only two. The royally dressed Narasimha faces directly northward, wears a short crown on his lion head, and bares his teeth in a face resembling a Pallava-style lion. His front pair of arms rises up at the sides of his head with claws bared. The figures are badly damaged, but we may assume that his back pair of arms \(the second down in the sequence\) holds the wheel and conch as in other sculptures. On the west his third left hand grasps the asura’s left shoulder from behind, and his fourth left hand is hidden behind the asura. On the east the third right hand stretches below the wheel eastward and holds what is probably the mace; and his fourth right hand at the level of his waist appears to be a closed fist resembling the balimudra or mushtimudra. Narasimha’s entire upper body faces north, but his lower body twists westward and his left leg extends downward to bear his weight on the threshold of Indra’s palace. Except for the foot, Narasimha’s right leg is hidden by the asura’s left leg.




FIGURE 8.4. Narasimha holds Hiranyakashipu \(composite, prior to restoration\). IFDI.


Hiranyakashipu’s position, though mirroring Narasimha’s general outline, reveals his subordination. The lower part of his body faces eastward, his left leg is raised, and Narasimha’s grip on his left shoulder twists his upper body toward the viewer. Hiranyakashipu is crowned and his head tilts westward, away from Narasimha’s face at a severe angle. His right arm holds a sword that extends from behind the tip of his crown, but Narasimha’s grip renders this arm useless; his left arm stretches down at his left side, but what it holds is not clearly visible.

The panel’s three horizontal sections illustrate this event’s cosmic consequences. The figures at the top joyfully watch the struggle from heaven. They are probably Brahma, Indra, and Shiva; the two figures flying at the corners are gandharvas or vidyadharas \(bearers of the knowledge of spells\). Creatures at the bottom are in the nether worlds and fly away in fear. The two figures fleeing eastward are asuras known as panis; out of fear of the Bhagavan’s wheel and of Vedic mantras, they live in holes like snakes, as the undulating lines of the middle figure suggest \(*BP* 5.24.30\). The violent forms of Narasimha and Hiranyakashipu fill the space between heaven and the underworld. The small standing figure on the eastern side may be a prajapati, master of progeny. The large female standing on the west is most likely Goddess Shri as Majesty, for she is present at Narasimha’s enthronement, but like other devas is afraid to approach him. The female figure standing in the lower region and supporting her is probably Majesty’s realm, Goddess Bhumi or Earth; according to an Upanishad discussed below, whenever Narayana appears as Narasimha, Shakti appears as the twofold kriyashakti and bhutishakti. The first corresponds to Goddess Shri and the second to Goddess Bhumi.

The second and smaller panel to the east \(Figure 8.5\) is divided by a vertical axis, which runs down the left side of Narasimha’s head and through the navel of Hiranyakashipu’s recumbent body. Two badly damaged figures fly in the panel’s upper part toward this vertical axis. Narasimha stretches his right leg down to the ground, and rests his left foot on a raised ledge to support the asura’s torso with his left leg. He bends slightly toward the asura’s body, tilts his crowned head slightly eastward, and opens his mouth to expose a long tooth at each side. His highest pair of hands reveals claws; the next pair holds the conch and wheel; the pair below is difficult to see \(the right arm and hand are damaged, and the left arm emerges from behind the asura’s raised right arm\); and the front pair of hands join at the asura’s navel to rip him open at his center, which is the visual center of the panel. The asura’s head in the west falls sideways toward the viewer to reveal his anguished face. His legs in the east dangle uselessly, his limp left arm hangs down below the ledge on which Narasimha’s left foot rests, and his raised right arm bending at the elbow disappears eastward into the panel’s frame.




FIGURE 8.5. Narasimha rips open Hiranyakashipu \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


THE PANELS’ MEANINGS. The first Man-lion panel depicts him holding Hiranyakashipu in his burning blaze; it represents the first sadhana operating at the level of deep sleep \(*sushupti*\) and signifies part one of the “Secret Teaching about Man-lion’s Burning.” \(An extended discussion of the three sadhanas appears in Appendix 2.\) The second Man-lion panel depicts him ripping out the asura’s navel center; it represents the second sadhana operating at the level of dreaming sleep \(*svapna*\) and signifies part two of the “Secret Teaching about Man-lion’s Burning.” The third and final consecration of the set of three taught by the Plower in the *Satvata-samhita* is “Consecration to the Subtle” \(*sukshma-diksha*\). Its sadhana leads to the experience of the fourth during waking consciousness \(*jagrat*\). Krishna dancing on Kaliya in the final north-facing panel represents it, but before we move on, let us briefly pause to examine two important metaphors in the story of Hiranyakashipu: Prahlada as the Handle of Vishnu’s Axe and Prahlada as Shunahshepa.

Prahlada’s teachers used a thorn bush and an axe to describe the effects he had on asuras. Prahlada, they said, is “the thorn bush born in this sandalwood forest of Diti’s sons, whose root \(*mula*\) is uprooted \(*anmula*\) by Vishnu’s axe \(*parashu*\) and the little boy is its handle” \(*BP* 7.5.17\). The metaphor implies a grip made of thorn bush wood \(*kantakadruma*\) firmly linked to a piece of sharpened iron or stone to serve as a hatchet or axe \(*parashu*\) for chopping trees at their root. Both the handle and the head of the axe belong to Vishnu. Prahlada is its handle, but what is its sharpened head? The answer is provided by two related stories.

One is the story of Rama of the Axe \(Parashurama\), which we shall discuss more fully in chapter 15 \(Panel S1\). This Rama is the youngest son of Jamadagni in the lineage of the seer Bhrigu. His arrogant and excessive opponent is Arjuna Son of Kritavirya, a disciple of Dattatreya. Arjuna resembles the “sandalwood forest” in the metaphor above because he has a thousand arms and ten thousand sons. A single seed had generated a tree that sprouted a forest; Rama uses his axe to fell both tree and forest \(*BP* 9.15.34–35; 9.16.16–19\). According to the *Satvata-samhita*, Rama of the Axe lived in the Western Ghats of the ancient Dravida kingdoms, where he taught Narada the doctrines and consecrations he had learned from the Plower \(*SS* 1; Smith 1975: 515–516\). When told in the context of these two Man-lion panels, Rama’s story depicts the Plower’s omniscience purifying the sadhaka through sadhana.

The second story identifies this omniscience as consciousness without clinging \(*asanga*\). In the *Bhagavad-gita’s* fifteenth chapter, Krishna teaches Arjuna Son of Pandu about the hidden dimension of spacetime known through Veda. It appears as a fig tree \(*ashvattha*\) growing from its root above \(*urdhvamula*\).12 Its shape cannot be seen, it has no beginning and no end, and where it dwells is beyond comprehension. Branches nourished by the threads of matter grow beyond and below the root above; sense objects are their twigs and Veda’s chants are their leaves. Secondary roots descend as intentional acts and plant themselves in the world of humans. Krishna tells Arjuna, “Chop this fig tree’s fatly nourished root with the stout axe of non-clinging, search out that realm \(*padam*\) from which those who reach it do not return \[saying\], ‘I take refuge in that Person of the Beginning \(*adya purusha*\) from whom ancient creativity \(*pravritti*\) emerges.’“He then identifies that realm as his highest home \(*BG* 15.1–4; 6\).

The instrument \(*shastra*\) this Arjuna is to use must be an axe because he is to chop the root at the top of the tree. This single root is the source of the entire ashvattha nourished by the sap of passion \(*raga*\). But to get to it Arjuna must first use nonclinging consciousness to chop at the secondary roots of intentional action \(*karma*\); Krishna already taught him this in the scripture’s first six chapters. This high root \(*urdhvamulam*\) and its dangling secondary roots \(*mulani*\) recall the fear voiced by Prahlada’s teachers that Vishnu will use him to uproot \(*amula*\) the root \(*mula*\) of the asura forest.

Chopping with nonclinging is not sufficient in itself, however, because it may result in knowledge that goes no further than samkhya’s discrimination \(*viveka*\) between the person of perception \(*purusha*\) and matter \(*prakriti*\). An autonomous “This am I” can rule the sadhaka for its own interests. But through diksha, delight in Krishna has been born and has purified this ego without its knowledge. All that is required now is for jnana in Man-lion’s shape to replace the autonomous ego with delight in Krishna. The sadhaka’s delight will then see that the person of consciousness and the matter from which it has been isolated are both contained by God’s body.

A second important metaphor in the story of Hiranyakashipu occurs after Hiranyakashipu unsuccessfully tries to kill his son. He grows anxious: “This boy is like Shunahshepa and will not forget what I have done. Will he cause my death?” \(*BP* 7.5.45–46\). Ominously, Hiranyakashipu recognizes himself in Ajigarta \(Nothing to Swallow\). This defiled royal Angirasa Brahmin first sold his son to be a victim in Harishcandra’s rajasuya, then agreed to slaughter him, and finally lost him to the highly esteemed and pure royal Brahmin named Vishvamitra \(Friend to All\). The story illustrated by these two Man-lion panels is thus linked to the ceremonial birth of a king, to the release of a son from his deadly father, and to the “death” of the father when an acharya adopts his son as his own.13 Shunahshepa’s adoption is echoed by the acharya’s adoption of the sadhaka through the Vyuha-diksha.

Ajigarta in the story represents a “beastly” element still active within the sadhaka’s consciousness characterized by hungry desire and cruel violence.

After he played his crucial and violent role in Shunahshepa’s story, he disappeared. But the beastliness he represents reappears as the snake Kaliya in the next and final panel, to which we now turn. Shuka tells this story to the emperor Parikshit as he awaits his death by Takshaka’s bite, and that biting snake appears here as Kaliya.



### ***Panel 10: Krishna Dances on Kaliya the Snake in a Pool of the Yamuna River***

THE STORY. The episode illustrated here begins with a previous story of Garuda and the naga Kaliya \(*BP* 10.17.1–12\). Shuka explains to Parikshit that the black serpent came to this blackened pond because of a conflict with Garuda who, we recall, embodies the mantras of Veda; this serpent opposes them. His name, Kaliya, refers to time \(*kala*\) and to blackness \(*kala*\), both characterstics of the Bhagavan \(*BG* 11.32\). Moreover, Kaliya came to this pond from the abode of nagas called Ramanaka, an island in the sea that shares with Balarama the word rama or charm; one is Charm’s Realm, the other is Charm’s Power. The sea as endlessly restless and full of “graspers” is a metaphor for normal waking consciousness. All of these—the sea, its island, its inhabitant Kaliya, and Balarama—-originate in the Plower as Snake sitting in inebriated ease on the sanctum below.

Kaliya embodies the kalakuta spilled from Shiva’s cupped hands in the form of kalmasha opposed to Veda in ordinary waking consciousness. Opposition to Veda appears in the story as Kaliya’s conflict with Garuda occasioned by a customary ritual on Ramanaka, but caused by Kaliya’s excessive pride. People make monthly offerings to snakes at the foot of the tree called Lord of the Forest to avoid their bite. Nagas receive the offerings and offer Garuda a portion of them on each full-moon day. This way they avoid *his* bite. But Kadru’s son, Kaliya, was proud of his poison’s strength and one day challenged Garuda by eating up the portion set aside for him.

When a person becomes a sadhaka, Veda and Agama begin their purification of consciousness. In the story, when Garuda learned what Kaliya did he flew to Ramanaka to kill him, but the snake fought him with uplifted hoods, frightening tongues, fierce eyes, and poisonous fangs. Nevertheless, Garuda—who after all is the throne of the Slayer of Deluded Passion \(Madhusudana\)—-smacked Kaliya with his golden left wing. Kaliya trembled with fear and fled to a pool of the Yamuna River, where he knew Garuda could not go. Attacked by Veda, kalmasha fled “inland” to take refuge in the deepest level of consciousness.

Garuda could not go to this Yamuna River pool because of a curse by the seer of the *Rig Veda* named Saubhari.14 One day, while Saubhari was performing tapas in its waters, Garuda came to catch fish. The seer forbade him, but Garuda was hungry and caught one and ate it. Unfortunately it happened to be the fishes’ master, and they were bereft. Out of compassion for them Saubhari cursed Garuda: “If he ever enters the area and catches fish he will instantly die.” Kaliya was the only serpent who knew about this curse, which is why he went there for refuge and took up residence in a deep underwater cavern \(*BP* 10.16.63\). His presence was so deadly that not only was the Yamuna’s pure water poisoned but birds flying overhead would also fall dead, and the surrounding vegetation and animals would perish whenever touched by drops of its water blown by the wind \(*BP* 10.16.4–12\).

One hot summer’s day, Krishna goes without Balarama to Vrinda’s Forest with his cowherd friends \(*BP* 10.15.47–52\). The cowherd friends are thirsty from the heat and take their cattle to this Yamuna river pool, not knowing that it is poisoned. They wash their faces and mouths and promptly fall dead. But Krishna, who is the Ruler of Yoga’s Ruler, revives them with the amrita of his glance.15 The cowherds sit up, look at each other in wonder, and realize that Govinda’s gracious glance has brought them back to life.

Krishna, the Lord who is black, knows that the black river is poisoned because of the black snake hiding there from Garuda, and resolves to purify the Yamuna water \(*BP* 10.16\).16 He girds his loins, slaps his biceps, climbs a kadamba tree, and jumps into the pool, splashing water the distance of a hundred bows. Krishna smiles as he plays in the water. But Kaliya suddenly emerges from the depths and sees him who has the Shrivatsa on his chest, wears a yellow cloth, has feet like lotuses, and skin dark as a rain cloud—and bites him. He winds Krishna in his coils until Gopala completely disappears. The cowherds on the bank, watching all this, collapse from grief and fear, and their cattle bellow. Omens of danger appear everywhere. Nanda and others in Gokula see these omens, and knowing that Balarama did not go with Krishna, fear that Krishna might be dying. Anxious and pathetic they set out to find him, like cows searching for lost calves, following his footprints with their emblems of lotus, barley grain, goad, thunderbolt, and flag. Balarama watches and keeps quiet, chuckling to himself, for he knows his brother’s prowess.17

They reach the pond and are stunned by a horrifying sight: the snake has enveloped Krishna, who does not move, and his cowherd friends lie unconscious amid bellowing cattle. Yashoda wants to go into the water after her son, but the other women hold her back. Nanda and the other men try to do the same, but Balarama restrains them. After an hour, Krishna acknowledges their distress and swells his body until Kaliya is forced to loosen his coils. But the snake then spreads out his hoods, hisses and spits poison, and stares at Krishna’s face with hot unmoving eyes. Krishna encircles Kaliya in the way Garuda encircles his prey, and the serpent twists, keeping his eyes fixed him as his forked tongue licks the corners of his mouth and spits fiery poison. Eventually, however, Kaliya begins to grow weary, and Krishna makes his move: He pushes the snake’s head down, mounts his broad hood studded with jewels, and to music sounding from Heaven begins to dance as the First Teacher of All the Arts \(*BP* 10.16.26\). Each time Krishna stamps down on Kaliya’s 101 hoods, the snake’s many nostrils and mouths spit blood as beings gather in the sky, and on the banks of the pool gopas worship Krishna as the Ancient Male. Kishna’s wondrously violent dance crushes Kaliya’s heads, forcing him to remember Narayana, the Ancient Person, the guru of all that moves and does not move. And with this memory Kaliya mentally takes refuge in Him.

Kaliya’s wives, who watch the One who carries the moving universe as an embryo crush their husband, approach Krishna with their children. They prostrate themselves before him as refugees seeking protection from him who gives refuge.18 They then recite a long prayer which falls into three parts: acceptance, veneration, and petition. Like most prayers in the stories illustrated by the temple, the prayer Kaliya’s wives make to Krishna provides information crucial for interpreting both panel and story. Tradition divides it into three parts.19

Part One: Kaliya’s wives first accept the justice of his punishment and view it in fact as a privilege:

This, your punishment, is the grace that removes all defilement from those who are untrue. Our husband, embodied as a snake, has received grace in the form of your anger, which must result from great tapas performed in previous lives, or from acts of dharma performed for others, which please you who exist in all souls. Goddess Shri herself performed lengthy tapas and severe vows for the privilege of bearing the dust of your feet.20 Refugees at your feet desire nothing more, neither heaven, nor lordship of earth, nor the position of Brahma, nor the rule of Rasatala, nor the siddhis of yoga—-not even the end of rebirth. This lord of serpents is of wrathful disposition and born of darkness, but now he possesses what is desired by those who are embodied and whirling in the wheel of samsara.

Part Two: Kaliya’s wives now venerate Krishna as the Bhagavan and the Purusha, as the transcendent and supreme atman residing in all beings as inner controller, and as Time the external controller and witness of all. They venerate the four formations: first Krishna, then Rama who is “extracted” from Vasudeva, and then Pradyumna and Aniruddha as masters of the Satvatas.21 Krishna, they say, is Time who brings forth, sustains, and dissolves the universe; and is the Bhagavan who is simultaneously the universe and its witness.

Part Three: Finally, Kaliya’s wives ask Krishna to be gracious to their husband before he dies. “Women deserve the pity of ‘good people’ \(*sadhu*\). Our husband is the breath of our lives. Tell us what we should do for you, because one who obeys you with faith \(*shraddha*\) is free from all fear.” Krishna responds graciously and releases their naga husband. Kaliya, breathing with difficulty, forms the anjalimudra and says to Krishna: “We snakes are a ferocious group you created; how can we overcome your maya by ourselves? You rule the moving universe, you know all things, and you may bestow your grace or withhold it as you see fit.” Krishna responds graciously once again: “You must leave this river and return to the sea. Anyone who remembers this episode and sings of it at the twilights need not fear you. Whoever fasts and bathes here where I have played, worships devas with libations of water, and worships me with unbroken concentration will be freed of all sins. Go back to Ramanaka. Garuda will not harm you, for my footprint is now on your head.” Kaliya and his wives give Krishna gifts, worship him, circumambulate him, and Krishna gives them leave to return to Ramanaka in the sea. The pool of Yamuna water is now as pure as amrita.

THE PANEL. The panel depicts the moment Kaliya and his wives take refuge in Krishna \(Figure 8.6\). The viewer stands in the place of the cowherds watching the scene from the bank. Krishna with two arms entirely fills the panel as he dances on the snake. His right leg stretches downward to the lower eastern corner, and his right foot stands on Kaliya’s body. The diagonal from this corner at the lower east to the corner at the upper west runs through Krishna’s right foot, right leg, chest, and left arm to his left hand holding Kaliya’s tail, its end dangling. Krishna’s torso and crowned head face directly north toward the viewer, and his head tilts eastward with an expression of pleasure. His right hand at the center of his lower chest appears to form the ankushamudra, which Lakshmana forms in Panel 6 \(chapter 7\): the back of the hand faces the viewer, his forefinger bends like a hook, and his other three fingers curl slightly \(*PS* 41\).




FIGURE 8.6 Panel 10: Krishna dances on Kaliya the snake in a pool of the Yamuna River. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Kaliya’s crowned head, with hoods behind it, appears just below Krishna’s upraised right knee. The details of Kaliya’s figure have been erased by damage, but his tail stretches upward along the panel’s western side. On the eastern side Krishna pins down his body with his right foot, pulls his tail up on the western side, and leaves Kaliya’s hooded head and arms free to pay him homage. His head and torso parallel the diagonal of Krishna’s raised right shin as Kaliya forms the anjalimudra directed toward Krishna’s right foot. A female figure forms the anjalimudra directly below Krishna’s axial center; she is Kaliya’s chief wife and represents all the others as they praise Krishna and pray for the sake of their husband.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. First, this panel uses the Yamuna pool of water to represent the final level of the sadhaka’s consciousness, the sheath made of joy. Elements in the story suggest that the cowherds \(in whose place the viewer stands\) represent a dimension within the sadhaka witnessing Krishna purify the deepest level of his own consciousness, represented by the pool. Krishna at the pool is repeatedly said to be the cowherds’ “breath of life” \(*prana*\). When he disappears into Kaliya’s coils, the cowherds collapse on the bank of the pool, some unconscious and others riveted with attention, like the bodily organs of the bhakti-yogin on the way to samadhi. When Kaliya is banished from this domain of deep consciousness back to the surface of waking consciousness where he belongs, he is a devotee protected by Krishna’s footprint on his head. When the victorious Krishna comes out of the amrita-pure water, the cowherds come to life and center themselves joyfully in him, as if they are performing puja to him as an icon.

Second, the panel depicts kalmasha resident in this sheath made of joy, in the form of the snake Kaliya. Kalmasha poisons the material thread of passion \(*rajoguna*\) and causes it to produce desire \(*kama*\) and anger \(*krodha*\), and they cause a person to do evil \(*papa*\) even against his or her intention \(*BG* 3.36–43\). Kalmasha at this level of consciousness is beyond the reach of the Veda, for even though Garuda is made of Vedic mantras he cannot approach this pool and remove Kaliya’s defilement. Only Krishna can do that.

This pool in the final panel of the northern side also alludes to the pool in the first panel through a visual play on the homonym *naga*, which denotes both a snake and an elephant. This homonymic use of *naga* identifies “beastly” ignorance with two shapes. The naga Gajendra at the beginning of this northern side is carnal lust in the gross body, in the superficial sheath made of food. The naga Kaliya is poisonous kalmasha in the deepest level of consciousness, in the sheath made of joy. Further, Krishna’s ankushamudra identifies him as the “grasper of the hook” \(*ankushagraha*\), the mahout. He is in charge of the naga elephant in Varuna’s pond at the northwest corner where night’s final hour begins, and he is in charge of the naga snake at this northeast corner where night’s final hour ends.

This panel subtly alludes to Shiva’s subordinate status in relation to Krishna by means of the snake and his venomous kalmasha. Shiva’s blue throat signifies his compassion, for out of his desire to serve Narayana this “Ruler of Yoga” keeps kalakuta’s death in his throat like a snake. But here Narayana as the “Ruler of the Ruler of Yoga” dances away the remainder that dripped from Shiva’s hands. Shiva is famous for his violent tandava dance under a banyan tree. As he dances, the story says, the king of snakes named Karkotaka darts at his leg and Shiva immediately assumes the “snake-fright posture” \(*bhujamgatrasa*\). The Pallava king Mahendravarman depicted this event in the cave-temple built at Siyamangalam in the seventh century \(Srinivasan 1964: 92; Pl. XXIII; Zvelibil 1985: 7–8\). In contrast to Shiva, however, when the ferocious Kaliya attacks, Krishna does not assume a posture of fright, but lets Kaliya envelop him until it is time to swell up and break his grip. And then Krishna mounts Kaliya’s many hoods, dances his wondrously violent tandava, and leaves his footprint on the snake’s head to protect nagas from Garuda, and to remind sadhakas that he protects them from venomous kalmasha. Krishna’s foot solves the problem left by Shiva when his neck turned blue.

Furthermore, this panel depicts the content of omniscient knowledge when the deepest sheath of consciousness is purified. The content is Gopala Krishna. But what happens to the devotee who approaches this level of purification? Krishna says he approaches “extinction in *brahman*” \(*brahmainirvana*\): “His pleasure within, his joy within, his light within, he with consciousness unified becomes *brahman* and approaches extinction in *brahman*. Seers in whom kalmasha is destroyed attain brahmanirvana: Their doubts dispelled, their self in control, they take pleasure in friendliness toward all beings. Brahmanirvana revolves on all sides of these people of restrained senses and controlled thoughts, who are unlinked from desire and anger, and know the atman” \(*BG* 5.24–25\). To know the atman, moreover, is to know Vasudeva Krishna, for he *is* one’s atman \(*BP* 11.13.27–29; 14.45\). This episode makes the same point, for when Krishna emerges from the purified pond he wears the jewels and gifts given by Kaliya’s wives, decorated like a material form \(*murti*\) dressed for puja worship. The cowherds now see who Gopala Krishna truly is and receive him accordingly \(*BP* 11.18.13–19\).

Nevertheless, their awakened knowledge of Krishna remains subject to the darkness inherent to the body, as events during the night illustrate. The hungry and tired cowherds spend the night on the riverbank with their cattle \(*BP* 10.17.20–25\). While they are sleeping a forest fire breaks out and surrounds them. They wake in alarm and seek refuge in Krishna, for now they know he is the Ruler born as a human through maya: “O Krishna, Krishna, great beyond measure, Dear One of unlimited prowess, we’re yours, but the mouth of this fierce fire of darkness \(*tamas*\) will consume us. Protect us from the Fire of Time. We seek refuge at your feet where there is no fear.” The Ruler of the Moving Universe sees their helplessness and drinks up the fire, for He is Ananta; the Infinite has infinite potency.

The cowherds of this final panel take refuge from the dark Fire of Time, just as Gajendra of the initial panel takes refuge from carnal desire. But there is a crucial difference between the beginning and the end. Gajendra mentally seeks refuge from ignorance after a thousand years of struggle with carnal passion only because he remembers teachings from his previous life as a Pandya king. These cowherds, however, instantly take refuge from dark Fire of Time because they perceive Krishna’s true identity. This is the simple difference between the beginning and the ending of the “waking up” process represented by these six panels facing north: At the beginning one takes refuge from the long struggle with delusion because one has heard of God or remembers God. But at the end one instantly takes refuge from the sudden eruption of the dark Fire of Time because one knows and sees God. And this is because God graciously revealed Himself in the waters of consciousness He purified.

Krishna continues to reveal himself to the cowherds after this episode until he and Balarama leave for Mathura in Akrura’s chariot, which the next panel on the eastern side depicts \(Panel 11, discussed in chapter 6\). Between dancing on Kaliya’s head and departing for Mathura, Krishna does the following; 1\) slays the asura Pralamba \(*BP* 10.18\); 2\) swallows a forest fire \(10.19\); 3\) dances as a peacock playing the flute \(10.21\); 4\) steals the gopis’ clothes \(10.22\); 5\) lifts Govardhana and receives the title Govinda \(10.24–27\); 6\) reveals to gopas his realm beyond darkness \(10.28\); 7\) dances the rasalila with the gopis \(10.29–33\); 8\) transforms Sudarshana and destroys Shankhachuda \(10.34\); 9\) kills Arishta, an asura in the shape of a bull \(10.36\); 10\) slaughters Keshin, an asura in the shape of a horse \(10.37.1–9\); and 11\) slays Vyoma, an asura in the shape of a gopa \(10.37.27–34\).

In other words, the entire span of the Krishna Story from the Kaliya episode until the Keshi and Vyoma episodes is represented by this sanctum’s northeast corner of sunrise. This final panel, in which Krishna faces north as he dances on the head of the serpent Kaliya, condenses *all* of this knowledge of Krishna; it depicts the content of jnana seen by the sadhaka who truly is “awake.”




