+++
title = "25"

+++


25. Vaiśvānara (is the highest Self), on account of the distinctions qualifying the common term.

The Cḥandogas read in their text, 'You know at present that Vaiśvānara Self, tell us that,' &c., and further on, 'But he who meditates on the Vaiśvānara Self as a span long,' &c. (Cḥ. Up. V, 11, 6; 18, 1). The doubt here arises whether that Vaiśvānara Self can be made out to be the highest Self or not. The Pūrvapakshin maintains the latter alternative. For, he says, the word Vaiśvānara is used in the sacred texts in four different senses. It denotes in the first place the intestinal fire, so in Br̥. Up, V, 9, 'That is the Vaiśvānara fire by which the food that is eaten is cooked, i.e. digested. Its noise is that which one hears when one covers one's ears. When man is on the point of departing this life he does not hear that noise.'--It next denotes the third of the elements, so in R̥. Saṁh. X, 88, 12, 'For the whole world the gods

have made the Agni Vaiśvānara a sign of the days.'--It also denotes a divinity, so R̥. Saṁh. I, 98, 1, 'May we be in the favour of Vaiśvānara, for he is the king of the kings,' &c. And finally it denotes the highest Self, as in the passage, 'He offered it in the Self, in the heart, in Agni Vaiśvānara'; and in Pra. Up. I, 7, 'Thus he rises as Vaiśvānara, assuming all forms, as breath of life, as fire.'--And the characteristic marks mentioned in the introductory clauses of the Cḥandogya-text under discussion admit of interpretations agreeing with every one of these meanings of the word Vaiśvānara.

Against this primā facie view the Sūtra declares itself. The term 'Vaiśvānara' in the Cḥāndogya-text denotes the highest Self, because the 'common' term is there qualified by attributes specially belonging to the highest Self. For the passage tells us how Aupamanyava and four other great Rḥshis, having met and discussed the question as to what was their Self and Brahman, come to the conclusion to go to Uddālaka because he is reputed to know the Vaiśvānara Self. Uddālaka, recognising their anxiety to know the Vaiśvānara Self, and deeming himself not to be fully informed on this point, refers them to Aśvapati Kaikeya as thoroughly knowing the Vaiśvānara Self; and they thereupon, together with Uddālaka, approach Aśvapati. The king duly honours them with presents, and as they appear unwilling to receive them, explains that they may suitably do so, he himself being engaged in the performance of a religious vow; and at the same time instructs them that even men knowing Brahman must avoid what is forbidden and do what is prescribed. When thereupon he adds that he will give them as much wealth as to the priests engaged in his sacrifice, they, desirous of Release and of knowing the Vaiśānara Self, request him to explain that Self to them. Now it clearly appears that as the R̥shis are said to be desirous of knowing--that Brahman which is the Self of the individual souls ('what is our Self, what is Brahman'), and therefore search for some one to instruct them on that point, the Vaiśvānara Self--to a person acquainted with which they address themselves--

can be the highest Self only. In the earlier clauses the terms used are 'Self and 'Brahman,' in the later 'Self' and 'Vaiśvānara'; from this it appears also that the term 'Vaiśvānara,' which takes the place of 'Brahman,' denotes none other but the highest Self. The results, moreover, of the knowledge of the Vaiśvānara Self, which are stated in subsequent passages, show that the Vaiśvānara Self is the highest Brahman. 'He eats food in all worlds, in all beings, in all Selfs'; 'as the fibres of the Ishīkā reed when thrown into the fire are burnt, thus all his sins are burned' (V, 18, I; 24, 3).

The next Sūtra supplies a further reason for the same conclusion.

