+++
title = "242"
+++
Love for Kṛṣṇa Is Attained Only by Sat-sanga 
२४२ । तामेव व्यनक्ति (११।१२।९ ) - 
IN THE NEXT VERSE, Kṛṣṇa makes evident the fact that this love for Him cannot be attained by any other means [only through sat-sanga]: 
यं न योगेन साङ्ख्येन दानव्रततपोऽध्वरैः । 
व्याख्यास्वाध्यायसन्यासैः प्राप्नुयाद् यत्नवानपि ॥ ७३१ ॥ 
[The gopis and the others attained Me (mām iyuḥ) through love (bhava)], which (yam) cannot be attained, even if one strives with great endeavor, by yoga, sankhya, charity, sacred vows, penance, sacrifice, exposition of sacred texts, study of the Vedas, or adopting the path of formal renunciation. (SB 11.12.9)1 
यं भावम् । अत्रापि योगादयो भगवत्परा एव । योगादिभिर्यत्नवानपीत्यनेन तत्प्राप्त्यर्थं प्रयुज्यमानत्वावगमात् । 
1 
yam na yogena sankhyena dana-vrata-tapo'dhvaraih vyakhya-svadhyāya-sannyasaiḥ präpnuyad yatnavän api 
Sridhara Svami comments that this verse is syntactically connected to the previous verse and in particular to the words mam iyuh. Thus, according to his explanation, the basic syntax would be as follows: "The gopis and the others attained Me (mām iyuh), who (yam) cannot be attained (na prapnuyat) by yoga and so on." Jiva Gosvami, on the other hand, takes the pronoun yam as referring to the love (bhava) by which Krsna is attained. These two views can be harmonized by the understanding that both Krsna and the means to attain Him (bhava) are possible only through sat-sanga, not by any other means. 
209 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
In this verse, the relative pronoun yam, "which," refers to the love (bhäva) mentioned in the previous verse. The various practices specified in this verse, such as yoga, are understood to be enacted specifically in regard to Bhagavan, because Krsna's statement that love for Him cannot be attained by yoga and the other means even if one strives with great endeavor implies a context in which such methods are employed for the purpose of attaining Him. 
एष्वपि श्रीगोपीनां परमकाष्ठाप्राप्तिं दर्शयितुम् "अथैतत् परमं गुह्यं शृण्वतो यदुनन्दनः” ( भा० ११ ११ १४९) इत्येतत्पूर्वोक्तपरमगुह्यत्वस्य परमकाष्ठां दर्शयितुम् “रामेण सार्धम् ” ( भा० ११।१२।१० ) इत्यादिप्रकरणमनुसन्धेयम् ॥ श्रीभगवान् ॥ 
Even among those who attained love for Krsna [through satsanga, as mentioned in the previous verse (SB 11.12.8)], only the gopis attained the highest development of this love (parakāṣṭhā). To demonstrate this clearly, Kṛṣṇa previously alluded to this fact with these words: "Therefore, O descendant of Yadu, Uddhava, please attentively hear this supremely confidential truth (parama-guhya)" (SB 11.11.49). One should examine the section of verses beginning with SB 11.12.10 [and ending with SB 11.12.13], which are spoken to make evident that the gopis' love is the highest limit (parākāṣṭha) of the most confidential truth referred to in SB 11.11.49. 
Commentary 
ŚRI KṚṢNA confirms that the bhava, or love, that the gopis and others attained was made possible only by sat-sanga. All other processes, such as yoga, even if executed in relation to Krsna, do not have the potency to grant love. Certainly, if these other processes are performed independently, they do not have any capacity to bestow love. Moreover, without the assistance of bhakti, they cannot even grant liberation. This was discussed earlier (in Anucchedas 65-84). 
2 
For the translation of these verses, see the commentary. 
210 
242 Love for Krsna Is Attained Only by Sat-sanga 
Love is the only thing that can control Bhagavan completely. The highest limit of this love is found only in the gopis. This limit is called mahabhava. The symptoms of mahabhava include the inability to tolerate separation from Krsna even for a moment (nimeṣāsahata) and to perceive a moment of separation from Him as equal to a kalpa (kalpa-kṣaṇatvam, Ujjvala-nilamani 14.161). In the following four verses referred to by Jiva Gosvami at the end of this anuccheda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa describes to Uddhava the state of mahabhava experienced by the gopis after He left Vraja to go to Mathura and then to Dvaraka: 
3 
After Akrura had taken Me to Mathura along with Balarama, the gopis, whose minds were attached to Me through intense love and who suffered acute pangs of separation, did not consider anything other than Me as a source of delight. 
My dear Uddhava! Those very nights that passed as though barely half a moment when the gopis were united with Me, their most beloved, while I was present in Vrndāvana, appeared to them like a kalpa when bereft of My company. 
Like sages who lose all awareness of names and forms while absorbed in the state of samadhi, the gopis, whose intellective faculties were intently fixed on Me due to our reunion (anusanga), could not ascertain whether they (ātmānam) and all that is theirs (svam) belonged to "this world" [(idam), i.e., the prakaṭa-lila] or to "the world beyond" [(adah), i.e., the aprakata-lila]. Like rivers merged in the ocean, they entered into Me alone. 
Some of these vulnerable women (abalah) longed for Me as their husband (mat-kamah ramanam), and some, being unaware of their own intrinsic nature [as My eternal consorts], yearned for Me as their paramour (jaram). Yet all of them attained Me, the Supreme Brahman. By their association (sangat) hundreds of thousands of other women also attained Me. (SB 11.12.10-13)3 
rāmeņa sārdham mathuram pranite svaphalkina mayy anurakta-cittah vigaḍha-bhavena na me viyoga-tivradhayo'nyam dadrsuh sukhāya tās tāḥ kṣapāḥ presṭhatamena nītā mayaiva vṛndavana-gocarena ksanardhavat taḥ punar anga tasam hină maya kalpa-sama babhuvuḥ tā nāvidan mayy anuṣanga-baddha-dhiyaḥ svam atmanam adas tathedam yatha samādhau munayo'bdhi-toye nadyah pravista iva nāma rupe → 
211 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
A detailed explanation of these verses is given in Kṛṣṇa Sandarbha (Anucchedas 175-177). 
212 
mat-kamā ramanam jāram asvarupa-vido'balah brahma mam paramam prapuh sangac chata-sahasrasah 
