+++
title = "245"
+++
Paricarya Established by Vyatireka 
२४५ | व्यतिरेकेणाह (भा० १० १८४।१३) - 
THE IMPORTANCE of service (paricarya) to highly realized devo- tees is indirectly established by the logic of disaffirmation (vyatireka) [i.e., by asserting the deficiency of those who fail to do so], as in this statement of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to the sages: 
यस्यात्मबुद्धिः कुणपे त्रिधातुके स्वधीः कलत्रादिषु भौम इज्यधीः । यत्तीर्थबुद्धिः सलिले न कर्हिचिज् जनेष्वभिज्ञेषु स एव गोखरः ।। ७३५ ।। 
One whose self-concept (atma-buddhiḥ) is rooted in this corpse- like body, which is constituted of the three elements, mucus, bile, and air; whose sense of relation (sva-dhih) is in his wife, children, and other kin; whose concept of divinity (ijya-dhih) is in earthen images; and whose notion of the sacred (tirtha- buddhih) is in the water of a river; but who never cherishes the sense of self, of relation, of divinity, and of the sacred, in regard to those who have realized the Absolute, is indeed an ass among cows. (SB 10.84.13)1 
जडत्वात् कुणपे स्वयं मृततुल्ये शरीरे । चिद्योगेऽपि त्रिभिर्वातपित्तादिभिर्धातुभिर्दूषित इत्यर्थः । भौमे देवताप्रतिमादौ । 
[Here, the person being described is one whose self-concept (ätma-buddhiḥ) is rooted] "in a corpse" (kunape), meaning "in 
1 
yasyatma-buddhiḥ kunape tri-dhatuke sva-dhiḥ kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih yat-tirtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij janesv abhijnesu sa eva go-kharaḥ 
219 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
the body" (sarire), which of its own accord is compared to dead matter, because it is inert. Even when animated by the pres- ence of consciousness (citta), the body is defiled by its three constituents mucus, bile, and air. This is the sense. The word bhaume, "in earthen images," refers to the deity forms (pratimas) of the devatās [but not to those of Bhagavan]. 
यत् यस्य । अभिज्ञेषु तत्त्ववित्सु ता बुद्धयो न सन्ति । तत्रात्मबुद्धिः परमप्रीत्यास्पदत्वम् । 
The pronoun yat [in the second line] means "whose" (yasya), referring to the person whose psychological perspectives (buddhis) - including the sense of self, of relation, of divinity, and of the sacred- are not cherished in regard to those who have realized the Absolute (abhijñeşu), the direct perceivers of Reality (tattva-vid). In this context, the self-concept (atma- buddhih) implies whatever a person considers as his object of greatest affection (parama-priti-äspadatvam). 
स एव गोखरो गोनिकृष्ट उच्यते । यद्वा सिन्धुसौवीरप्रसिद्धो वन्यगर्दभजातिविशेषो म्ले- च्छजातिविशेषो वा सः । न त्वन्यः प्रसिद्धः । विवेकित्वाभिमानितायां सत्यामप्यविवेकि- त्वात् ततोऽपि निकृष्टत्वं तस्येति । 
That person indeed (sa eva) [who does not cherish these per- spectives in regard to realized beings] is described as "an ass among cows" (go-kharah), meaning "the lowest of the cows" (go-nikṛsta). Alternatively, the word go-kharah may refer to a particular species of wild donkeys found in the lands of Sindhu and Sauvira [part of Pakistan and Afghanistan] or to a class of mlecchas, or outcastes. The term go-kharah is not known to apply to anything else. [In truth, however, it is the person described in the verse who is to be designated as a go-khara, and not the animal so-named.] This is because, although he prides himself as being a man of wisdom, in reality, he is bereft of dis- crimination. For this reason, he is lower even than the lowest of animals, a wild donkey, or an outcaste. 
भौम इज्यधीरिति साधारणदेवताविषयकमेव पूर्वं तथैवोपक्रान्तत्वात् "अर्चायामेव हरये” (भा० ११।२।४७) इत्यादिविरोधाच्च । 
220 
245 Paricarya Established by Vyatireka 
In the phrase, “whose concept of divinity (ijya-dhiḥ) is in earthen images (bhaume)," the object of the person's reverence is specifically the deity forms of the ordinary devatās, as under- stood from the immediately preceding verses [SB 10.84.10-12, in which this topic is begun]. Additionally, the reference can only be to the deity forms of the ordinary devatās [and not to those of Bhagavan Viṣṇu], otherwise this would contradict the principle established in the verse below: 
One who offers worship to Bhagavan Hari with faith in the deity form alone but who fails to honor Him as present in His devotees or in other living beings is recognized as a prākṛta-bhakta, or a devotee whose nature [prakṛti] is in the very beginning stage of formation. (SB 11.2.47)2 
तदेवं “यथा तरोर्मूलनिषेचनेन " ( भा० ४ । ३१ । १४ ) इत्यादिवाक्यमत्र नावतारयितव्यम् ॥ श्रीभगवान् मुनिवृन्दम् || 
2 
Thus, it would be inappropriate here to cite the verse given below [in justification of the go-khara's limited sense of divin- ity, because his worship is of the deity forms of the ordinary devatās, whereas in the verse that follows, the reference is to the worship of Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa]: 
3 
Just as by pouring water on the root of a tree, its trunk, branches, and twigs become nourished, and just as by supplying food to the vital life current (prana), the senses gain strength, so too by worshiping Bhagavan Acyuta [Krsna], the worship of all entities is effected. (SB 4.31.14)3 
arcayam eva haraye pujam yaḥ śraddhayehate 
na tad-bhaktesu canyesu sa bhaktah prakṛtah smrtah 
Here, the person who has faith only in the deity of Bhagavan Hari but not in His devotees is designated as a prakṛta-bhakta and not a go-khara. Thus, although both the prakṛta-bhakta and the go-khara have no sense of divinity in regard to true devotees, they are distinguished by the particular objects of their worship - Bhagavan and the ordinary devas, respectively. On this basis, it would be inappropriate to cite SB 11.2.47 to justify the go-khara's neglect of the devotees, because the verse applies to the prakṛta-bhakta and not to the go-khara. 
yatha taror mula-nisecanena trpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopasakhaḥ pranopahārac ca yathendriyaņām tathaiva sarvarhanam acyutejyä 
221 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
Commentary 
IN THE previous anuccheda, Sri Jiva Gosvāmī discussed the result of rendering service (paricarya) to great devotees of Bhagavan (mahā- bhagavatas). Now in this anuccheda, he establishes the importance of such service by the logic of disaffirmation (vyatireka). This is summed up in Krsna's pronouncement that a person who never renders service to great devotees is no better than an animal. 
According to the principal verse of this anuccheda (SB 10.84.13)," such people identify with four objects - the body, relatives, earthen images of the devas, and sacred water. Correspondingly, they hold four psychological perspectives - atma-buddhih, the sense of self; sva-dhiḥ, the sense of kinship or relatedness; ijya- dhiḥ, the concept of divinity; and finally, tirtha-buddhiḥ, the notion of the sacred. These four perspectives become limitations when chained to conditional objects of identification. 
Śri Krsna describes a person whose sense of self is limited to the body, whose sense of kinship is limited to his relatives, whose con- cept of the divine is limited to earthen images, and whose notion of the sacred is limited to a physical locality. Such a person does not cherish any of these psychological perspectives in regard to highly realized devotees. By this neglect, the very thing that characterizes his humanity is lost, and he is thus called a go-khara, "an ass among cows." This means that just as an animal is severely restricted in its awareness and sense of belonging and is incapable of inquiring into or knowing the Absolute, so too, such a person leads a life of ignorance. 
4 
The compound go-khara is formed from the nouns go and khara. Go means a cow, and khara means a donkey. Thus, go-khara can refer to a more intimidating type of animal, such as the distinct breed of wild donkeys found in Afghanistan. Alternatively, it can refer to a specific clan of mlecchas, or outcastes. The indeclinable eva, "indeed," in the clause sa eva go-kharah, "he indeed is an ass 
yasyatma-buddhiḥ kunape tri-dhatuke sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih yat-tirtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij janesv abhijñesu sa eva go-kharah 
222 
245 Paricarya Established by Vyatireka 
among cows," signifies that in reality this designation is applica- ble to the person characterized in Krsna's statement and not to the animal so-named nor to the outcaste or any other creature. The severity of this criticism is intended. 
A doubt may be raised here. In Śrī Jiva's earlier discussion of the threefold classification of devotees (Anucchedas 187-190), sage Havi defined the person who has faith only in the deity but not in the devotees as a prakṛta-bhakta, or a beginning devotee (SB 11.2.47). In Kṛṣṇa's statement, however, the person who has a sense of divin- ity toward the deity but not toward the devotees is labeled as a go- khara, "an ass among cows." Since the two appear to share the same basic defect in outlook, why is the former valued while the latter is disparaged? 
The difference lies in the fact that the go-khara does not recog- nize Bhagavan even in His deity form. He worships only the deity forms of some ordinary devatas and not Bhagavan Visņu. Such a person is bereft of true discrimination and is thus compared to an animal. Similarly, SB 4.31.14 should not be used to defend the wor- shiper of the devas who neglects the sage or advanced devotee. His or her worship of the devas cannot be compared to pouring water on the root of a tree, because the devas are not the root of existence and because worship of the devotees is inseparable from the core worship of Bhagavan. 
223 
