+++
title = "248"
+++
Hearing Bhagavan's Name 
२४८ । अथ क्रमप्राप्तं श्रवणम् । तच्च नामरूपगुणलीलामयशब्दानां श्रोत्रस्पर्शः । 
Now we will describe hearing, which is next in the sequence of devotional practices: When the ears contact words describing the name, form, qualities, and divine play of Bhagavan, it is known as hearing, śravanam. 
तत्र नामश्रवण यथा ( भा० ६ | १६ | ४४ ) - 
We will first cite an example of the power of hearing Bhagavan's name (nama-śravanam), as Citraketu expressed to Bhagavan Sankarṣana: 
न हि भगवन्नघटितमिदं त्वद्दर्शनान् नृणामखिलपापक्षयः । यन्नाम सकृच्छ्रवणात् पुक्कशोऽपि विमुच्यते संसारात् ॥ ७५८ ॥ 
O Bhagavan, it is not at all astonishing that by seeing You, human beings become free from all sins, because even an outcaste person (pukkasa) becomes liberated from material existence simply by hearing Your name just once. (SB 6.16.44)1 
तादृशस्यापि सकृच्छ्रवणेऽपि मुक्तिफलप्राप्तेरुत्तमस्य तच्छ्रवणे तु परमभक्तिरेव फलमित्यभिप्रेतम् || चित्रकेतुः श्रीसङ्कर्षणम् ॥ 
If even an outcaste person attains the fruit of liberation merely by once hearing Bhagavan's name, then a person of ennobled 
1 
na hi bhagavann aghatitam idam tvad-darsanan nṛṇām akhila-papa-kṣayah yan-nama sakṛc chravanat pukkaso'pi vimucyate samsarat 
243 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
birth who hears Bhagavan's name attains supreme devotion (parama-bhakti). This is the implication of the verse. 
Commentary 
AT THE BEGINNING of Anuccheda 236, it was said that there are various divisions of vaidhi-bhakti, including surrender, service to highly realized devotees, hearing, singing, and other similar acts of devotion. Surrender was discussed in Anucchedas 236-237, and service to sadhus, in Anucchedas 238-247. In the order of succession of bhakti's practices, hearing is the next limb to be treated, and it is discussed up to Anuccheda 262. 
A person's birth in a socially high or low ranking family occurs because of the fructification of their meritorious or unmeritorious karma executed in the past life or lives. To become liberated, one must become free of all one's past and present karma. Birth as a pukkasa, a denigrated outcaste tribe, is certainly the result of some such forbidden action. Under normal circumstances, the question of liberation from the influence of karma could hardly even arise to them. 
By reference to the pukkasas, Citraketu intends to make known the unprecedented purifying power of Bhagavan's name. Hearing Bhagavan's name just once relieves even a pukkasa of his or her karma and grants freedom from material bondage. If, however, one is free of offenses in the form of the obstacles to bhakti, then such hearing will award love of Bhagavan. This is the implied sense of this verse. 
A doubt may be raised in this regard. The name is transcendental, and its power is not dependent on anything material, such as the higher or lower birth status of the person who hears or chants. Why then does Śrī Jiva Gosvāmi comment that by hearing Bhagavan's name just once, a person of low birth, such a pukkasa, attains only mukti, whereas a person of high birth would attain prema? 
The reply is that it is assumed here that the disadvantaged birth is an outcome of some offense. Offenses impede the power of bhakti 
244 
248 Hearing Bhagavan's Name 
to disclose its most essential fruit of prema, because they are a source of displeasure to the name. Consequently, the name delivers such a person but does not award prema. It is moreover to be noted that Sri Jiva uses the word uttamasya in reference to the person of high social standing. This is not just anyone who happens to be born in a high-ranking family but one who is actually ennobled in the virtue and moral character that such a birth is meant to entail. If, by implication, the person is also free from offense, then he or she will attain prema. This is the sense of Śrī Jiva's statement. 
245 
