+++
title = "266"
+++
Rūpa-kirtanam 
२६६ | अथ श्रीरूपकीर्तनम् “प्रत्याक्रष्टुं नयनमबलाः” (भा० ११।३० ।३) इत्यादौ “यच्छ्रीर्वाचां जनयति रतिं कीर्त्यमाना कवीनाम्" इति । 
Now we will describe the practice of singing about or glorifying the forms of Bhagavan (rupa-kirtanam), as illustrated in King Parikşit's statement to sage Suka: 
Young women are unable to withdraw their vision from the form of Sri Krsna, their eyes being transfixed upon it. When that form becomes indelibly imprinted in the hearts of the sages, entering through the pathway of the ears, it never departs from there. When the abundant splendor of Bhagavan's form is glorified, it arouses attraction for the poets' speech and thus ensures their fame. When the warriors on the battlefield of Kuruksetra gave up their lives beholding that same form of Kṛṣṇa, who was seated upon the chariot of Arjuna, they attained liberation by merging into Him. (SB 11.30.3)1 
यस्य श्रीकृष्णरूपस्य शोभासम्पत्तिः कीर्त्यमाना सती कवीनां तत्कीर्तकानां वाचां तत्कीर्तनेष्वेव राग जनयति । अथोक्तं श्रीचतुः सनेन “कामं भवः स्ववृजिनैर्निरयेषु नः स्तात्” (भा० ३।१५।४९) इत्यादौ " वाचश्तु नस्तुलसिवद् यदि तेऽङ्घ्रिशोभाः” इति ॥ राजा श्रीशुकम् ॥ 
1 
pratyakraṣṭum nayanam abala yatra lagnam na sekuh karnavistam na sarati tato yat satām ātma-lagnam yac-chrir vacam janayati ratim kim nu manam kavīnām drstva jisnor yudhi ratha-gatam yac ca tat-samyam iyuḥ 
341 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
In the third line of the above verse, the pronoun yat, i.e., yasya, "of which," means "of the form (rupa) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa," and the word śri means "an abundance or wealth of splendor" (sobhāsampatti). When the abundant splendor of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's form is glorified (kīrtyamānā), it arouses attraction (rati, i.e., rāga) for the speech (vācā), meaning "for the kirtana of Kṛṣṇa's form" (tatkirtaneşu), of the poets (kavīnām), meaning "of those who sing the glories of Bhagavan's form" (tat-kirtakanām). Therefore, the four Kumāras also prayed: 
Let us gladly accept birth in a series of hellish species2 due to the offenses we have committed, if only our minds can take pleasure in Your feet, like bees that drink the nectar of flowers, if our speech can be endowed with the splendor of Your feet, as tulasi is beautified by contact with Your feet, and if the holes of our ears can be filled with the glorification of Your qualities. (SB 3.15.49)3 
Commentary 
THE DISCUSSION of the angas of vaidhi-bhakti, begun in Anuccheda 236, continues here. After explaining the principles of surrender (saranapatti) and service to devotees (sat-seva or bhāgavataseva), Jīva Gosvami delineated the practice of hearing (sravanam) about the names, forms, qualities, and lilas of Bhagavan in Anucchedas 248-262. He then discussed the practice of singing Bhagavan's names (nama-kirtana) in Anucchedas 262-265. Now he describes singing about His form (rupa-kirtana). 
2 
According to Sri Visvanatha Cakravarti, the word nirayesu, “in various hells,” means "in a series of hellish species" (narakiṣv api yonisu). This interpretation is also consistent with the actual details of the story. In addition, he takes the clause vacaś ca nas... yadi te'nghri-sobhah as meaning "if our speech can be that whose splendor (sobhah) is only in describing Your feet (anghri), meaning Your form, qualities, and names, and not in anything else." 
3 kamam bhavah sva-vrjinair nirayesu nah stac 
ceto'livad yadi nu te padayo rameta 
vacas ca nas tulasivad yadi te'nghri-sobhah puryeta te guna-ganair yadi karna-randhrah 
342 
266 Rupa-kirtanam 
The verse spoken by King Parikşit describes the unparalleled beauty of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. His beauty is so captivating that anyone who sees Him is unable to turn his or her eyes away. This is why He is called Krsna, "the All-attractive." When Krsna drove Arjuna's chariot on the battlefield, the warriors who died while beholding His form attained liberation. This is because their minds became fixed on His beauty. According to Krsna's statement in GĪTĀ 8.6, one attains whatever object one contemplates at the time of death. 
Krsna's beauty is so great that even Mahāviṣṇu was intensely eager to see Him. This is why He stole the newborn babies of a brāhmaṇa in Dvaraka, obliging Krsna to go to Mahavisņu's abode to retrieve them. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī writes that the sweetness of Krsna's beauty or form, rupa-mādhuri, is unparalleled (BRS 2.1.43). His beauty is so extraordinary that even He is amazed by it (SB 3.2.12). He is specifically attractive to women, especially the gopis (SB 10.29.40). 
Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī gives a further example of rupa-kirtana in the prayers offered by the Kumāra brothers, when they went to Vaikuntha to see Visņu. On arriving at the outskirts of Vaikuntha, they were stopped by Jaya and Vijaya, the gatekeepers of the seventh gate. This enraged the Kumāras, and thus they cursed Jaya and Vijaya. At that time, Śrī Visnu came walking to the gate to resolve the dispute. Seeing His beauty, the Kumāras, who had been absorbed in the bliss of Brahman from their very birth, became devotees. They prayed that they should never forget Bhagavan, even if they would have to go to hell for their act of cursing His devotees. It is to be noted in this regard that the beauty of Krsna is even more ravishing than that of Visnu. 
4 
5 
This story is described in chapter 89 of the Tenth Canto. It has been discussed at length in Krsna Sandarbha, Anuccheda 29. 
For a detailed description of this story, see Bhagavat Sandarbha, Anuccheda 79. 
343 
