+++
title = "292"
+++
A Brāhmaṇa Is Most Honorable among Human Beings 
२९२ । अथ पुरुषेषु पूर्वोक्तविशेषं जात्यादिना विवृणोति "पुरुषेष्वपि” (भा० ७ । १४ । ४१) इत्यादि । 
NÄRADA THEN elaborates on the previously mentioned spe- cial characteristic (pürvokta-viśeşam)' that distinguishes a per- son as uniquely worthy of honor [patra] among human beings, based on nobility of birth (jati) and related criteria: 
O King, even among human beings, the brahmana is known as a superior receptacle of Bhagavan, because through penance, knowledge, and self-satisfaction, he upholds the Veda, which is identical to the body of Bhagavan Hari. (SB 7.14.41)2 
यो धत्ते तं सुपात्रं विदुः ॥ 
That which holds (dhatte) is known as a suitable vessel (supă- tra). [The verse specifically mentions that the brahmana holds (dhatte) the Vedas, the body of Bhagavan, and this is what makes him eligible to receive honor (patra).] 
1 
2 
Previously, in SB 7.14.38 (Anuccheda 289), Narada pointed out that a human 
being's worthiness to receive honor (patratvam) is in accordance with the degree to which Bhagavan is disclosed to them proportionate to the 
development of jnana. Now he elaborates on this distinguishing characteristic 
from the point of view of nobility of birth (jati) and related criteria. 
purusesv api rajendra supatram brahmanam viduh 
tapasa vidyaya tustya dhatte vedam hares tanum 
493 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
Commentary 
EARLIER (in Anuccheda 289), it was said that among all types of living beings, humans are the best patra, or worthy recipients of honor. In this verse, Śrī Narada says that even among human beings, a brahmana is supremely worthy of honor. The reason for this is that he holds the Veda in his body. The Veda is compared to the body of Krsna, hares tanum, as Bhagavan Sankarṣaṇa affirms, "Sabda-brahman (the Veda) and Parabrahman are My eternal bod- ies" (SB 6.16.51). The prime duty of a brahmana is to study the Veda (Manu-smrti 1.88, 4.20). Kṛṣṇa says that the body of a brahmana is not meant for fulfilling petty desires but to engage in austerity (SB 11.17.42). Such a brahmana is worthy of respect by other human beings. 
At present there is a lot of criticism and animosity toward brahmanas and also against the scriptural injunction to respect a brahmana. This is based on a misunderstanding of the scripture. Every scripture that ordains one to respect a brahmana also delin- eates the duties of a brahmana. Those who do not follow these duties are called brahma-bandhus. By seeing the unmeritorious behavior of a brahma-bandhu, one should not criticize the scrip- tures, because the scriptures do indeed make such a distinction between the two. 
When Asvatthāmā, a brahmana by birth, killed the five sleeping sons of Draupadi, Arjuna set out in pursuit of him. Arjuna was able to find him and capture him. At that time, Krsna ordered Arjuna to kill Asvatthama, referring to him as a brahma-bandhu (brahma- bandhum imam jahi, SB 1.7.35). Thus the brahmana referred to in Narada's statement is not one who, although born to brahmana par- ents, betrays the qualification and character of a brahmana. Rather, he is one who embodies the true nature of a brahmana, as described by Śrī Kṛṣṇa: 
3 sabda-brahma param brahma mamobhe sasvati tanu 
4 
brahmanasya hi deho'yam ksudra-kāmāya neşyate krcchraya tapase ceha pretyananta-sukhaya ca 
494 
292 A Brahmana Is Most Honorable among Human Beings 
The duties of brahmanas, born of their acquired nature, include reg- ulation of the mind, regulation of the external senses, austerity, purity, forbearance, simplicity, knowledge, realization, and firm faith in scripture. (GĪTĀ 18.42)5 
5 
samo damas tapah saucam kṣantir arjavam eva ca jñānam vijñānam astikyam brahma-karma svabhava-jam 
495 
