+++
title = "338"
+++
Worship of Kṛṣṇa along with Rādhā 
Is Supreme 
३३८ । अनेन तत्रापि गोकुललीलात्मकस्य श्रीकृष्णस्य भजनमाहात्म्यातिशयो दर्शितः । तथा “पूतना लोकबालघ्नी” (भा० १०१६।३५) इत्यादौ च ज्ञेयम् । 
BY UDDHAVA'S LATTER statement [SB 3.2.23], it is shown that even within the worship of Krsna in general, the glory of Śri Kṛṣṇa bhajana as He manifests in the Gokula lila is supreme, as is also understood from verses such as this: 
The demoness Pūtana, who was a blood-sucking killer of infants, attained the liberated status [of a nursemaid in Goloka], simply by offering her breast for Bhagavan Hari to suckle, even though she did so with the intention of killing Him. (SB 10.6.35)1 
तथा श्रीकृष्णसन्दर्भे च "येन येनावतारेण ” ( भा० १० । ७ । १) इत्यादिकं विवृतमस्ति । 
This has also been explained in Śrī Kṛṣṇa Sandarbha [Anuccheda 51] in reference to verses such as the following: 
1 
O master, the deeds that Bhagavan Hari, the Supreme Con- troller (Iśvara), enacts through His different avataras, are charming to our ears and attractive to our hearts. If you think it fit, kindly narrate those particular exploits of Sri Hari [Krsna] by listening to which a person's depression and material han- kerings disappear, his mind is quickly purified, and devotion 
putana loka-bala-ghni raksasi rudhirasana 
jighamsayapi haraye stanam dattvapa sad-gatim 
765 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
to Śri Hari becomes manifest along with friendship toward His devotees. (SB 10.7.1-2)2 
अथ गोकुलेऽपि श्रीमद्वजवधूसहितरासादिलीलात्मकस्य परमवैशिष्ट्यमाह ( भा० १० |३३|४० ) - 
And even as regards Kṛṣṇa in Gokula, the glory of Śrī Kṛṣṇa when He performs pastimes such as the rasa-lila along with the gopis of Vraja is even more greatly distinguished, as described by Sri Sukadeva: 
विक्रीडितं व्रजवधूभिरिदं च विष्णोः श्रद्धान्वितोऽनुशृणुयादथ वर्णयेद् यः । भक्तिं परां भगवति प्रतिलभ्य कामं हृद्रोगमाश्चपहिनोत्यचिरेण धीरः ॥ १०७१ ॥ 
A person who is resolutely fixed (dhirah) and endowed with faith (śraddhänvitah) who repeatedly hears or relates these and other amorous sports of Sri Vişnu3 [Krsna] with the gopis of Vraja soon (acirena) attains supreme devotion (bhaktim param) to Bhagavan and is quickly (asu) freed from lust, the disease of the heart. (SB 10.33.40)* 
चकारादन्यच्च । अथेति वार्थ - शृणुयाद्वा वर्णयेद्वा । उपलक्षणं चैतद् ध्यानादेः । परां यतः परा नान्या कुत्रचिद् विद्यते तादृशीम् । हृद्रोगं कामादिकमपि शीघ्रमेव त्यजति । 
2 
3 
4 
yena yenavatāreņa bhagavan harir isvarah 
karoti karna-ramyani manojnani ca nah prabho 
yac-chrnvato paity aratir vitrsna sattvam ca suddhyaty acirena pumsaḥ bhaktir harau tat-puruse ca sakhyam tad eva haram vada manyase cet 
Sri Sanatana Gosvāmi comments that the name Visnu, "the Omnipresent One," 
is used in this verse to indicate Krsna's all-pervasiveness (vyapakatvam), since 
in the rasa-lila, He was simultaneously present in between each two gopis in the circle dance. 
vikriditam vraja-vadhubhir idam ca visnoḥ 
śraddhänvito'nuśṛnuyad atha varnayed yah 
bhaktim param bhagavati pratilabhya kamam 
hrd-rogam asv apahinoty acirena dhiraḥ 
The overall sentence syntax is according to the commentary of Sukadeva (Siddhanta-pradipa), who connects the word dhirah to sraddhanvitah as the subject, and the word acirena, "soon," to the predicate param bhaktim pratilabhya, "attains supreme devotion." He also interprets the word dhirah as "one who has conquered the obstacles to hearing and narrating" (sravane varnane va ye vighnās taj-jaya-silah). Sri Sanatana Gosvami glosses the same word as "one who knows the essential truth of all objects" (sarvārtha-tattva-vetta), and Śrī Giridhara glosses it as "one who has conquered the senses" (jitendriyah). 
766 
338 Worship of Krsna along with Radha Is Supreme 
The word ca, "and," implies other pastimes as well (anyac ca). The word atha is used in the sense of "or" (va), which means that one may either hear or describe these pastimes. By extension of meaning (upalakṣaṇa), this further implies meditation on the same pastimes (dhyana) and other related practices. The word parām, "supreme," is used as an adjective of bhakti, because there is no other devotion superior to this (para) [i.e., than that which follows the raga of the gopis]. It is specifically bhakti of this nature (tädrṛsim) that the practitioner attains. In addition, one very quickly gives up lust (kama) and other impurities, which are the diseases of the heart (hrd-rogam). 
अत्र सामान्यतोऽपि परमात्वसिद्धे तत्रापि परमप्रेष्ठश्रीराधासंवलितलीलामयतद्भजनं तु परमतममेवेति स्वतः सिध्यति । किन्तु रहस्यलीला तु पौरुषविकारवदिन्द्रियैः पितृपुत्र- दासभावैश्च नोपास्या – स्वीयभावविरोधात् । रहस्यत्वं च तस्याः क्वचिदल्पांशेन क्वचित् तु सर्वांशेनेति ज्ञेयम् ॥ श्रीशुकः ॥ 
In this regard, although the bhajana of Krsna as He appears in His liläs with the gopis is generally concluded to be supreme, yet highest of all (paramatamam) is the bhajana of Krsna in the midst of His liläs with His supremely beloved (parama-prestha) Śrī Rādha. This is the self-evident conclusion. But the confiden- tial liläs of Krsna with the gopis are not to be meditated upon by a person whose senses are agitated by sexual-emotional feel- ings (pauruşa-vikära), nor by devotees who relate to Bhagavan with the internal disposition (bhava) of a father, a son, or a ser- vant, because these līlās are in opposition to their own respec- tive bhavas. It should also be understood that the confidentiality (rahasyatvam) of these lilas is sometimes partial and sometimes complete. 
Commentary 
EARLIER IT WAS said that rāgānuga-bhakti is primarily executed toward Krsna, among all forms of Bhagavan. Krsna performs His līlās in Gokula, Mathura, and Dvaraka. Of these three abodes, rāgānuga-bhakti is most suitable specifically toward Kṛṣṇa in 
767III The Practice of Bhakti 
Gokula. This is the intention of citing Uddhava's statement (SB 3.2.23) in the previous anuccheda. This conclusion was also established in Krsna Sandarbha (Anuccheda 183). 
In Gokula, Krsna is surrounded by His parents, His cowherd friends, and the gopis. Of all these different associates, His līlās with the gopis stand above all others. Then again, among all the lilās with the gopis, the rasa-lila is preeminent. And of all the gopis, Sri- mati Radha is supreme. Consequently, the worship of Krsna along with Radha is the foremost worship. 
Śrī Jiva cites the last verse of the five chapters describing rasa- līlā (SB 10.33.40). In this verse, Śrī Sukadeva praises the benefit of hearing or describing the narrations of rasa-lila. Sri Jīva warns, however, that those who are not free from sexual-emotional agi- tation (pauruşa-vikara) should not hear or describe the confiden- tial dealings of Krsna with the gopis. The reason for this is that if such a person were to listen to these confidential dealings, his or her sexual desire would become stimulated, and the mind would become thus captivated. Then instead of thinking of service, the practitioner would only think of his or her own enjoyment. 
The characteristic of the mind is that it activates past memories by hearing or seeing objects and actions that resemble one's past experiences. This happens automatically without one's conscious involvement. If the mind becomes filled with sexual thoughts, then to overcome this condition becomes problematic. Either the desire is repressed or one engages in sexual acts in a covert manner. Any- thing that is repressed comes up again with stronger force and may even compel one to act on it abnormally. Even if one man- ages to repress sexual desire, it can resurface in the dream state and prompt one to fulfill the repressed desire within the subcon- scious mind, because one has no control over dreams. So, in both cases repression or covert engagement - one will become devi- ated from the path of bhakti due to the mind's being flooded with sensual thoughts. Therefore, one must be careful and heed Sri Jiva's advice. There have been many examples of devotees straying away from the path of bhakti or acting hypocritically because of not being judicious in the matter of hearing or describing the rasa-lila. 
768 
338 Worship of Krsna along with Radha Is Supreme 
A doubt may be raised in this regard. Sukadeva's statement seems to be saying just the opposite of the warning expressed by Śrī Jiva. Suka says that by hearing or describing Krsna's amorous lilās with the gopis of Vraja, a person is freed from sexual desire (kama), the disease of the heart (hrd-rogam). This is the standard argument posited by those who advocate remembrance (smarana) or hearing (śravana) of confidential pastimes (rahasya-lila). 
The answer lies in the word dhirah. The recommendation to hear or describe this lila is for a person who is dhirah, or one who is established in sattva-guna. Such a person will certainly benefit from hearing Krsņa's lilas with the gopis. Those who are under the influence of rajas and tamas, however, will find it difficult. Moreover, these lilas should be heard from a qualified speaker, oth- erwise it will only lead to an adverse result, as stated in Narada Pañcaratra: 
One who expounds teachings without consideration of what is appropriate and one who listens to such teachings without the required eligibility - these two both glide into a terrible hell for unlimited time. (Narada Pañcaratra)5 
In addition, Śri Jiva says that those who relate to Bhagavan with the internal disposition (bhava) of a parent, a son, or a servant should also not dare to hear the rasa-lila, because it goes against their bhāva. Certainly parents should not listen to the intimate affairs of their adolescent children, nor the children of their par- ents, nor the servants of their master. Such descriptions do not nourish their bhava. 
yo vakti nyāya-rahitam anyayena srnoti yah tavubhau narakam ghoram vrajatah kalam akşayam Cited in Hari-bhakti-vilasa 1.101. 
769 
5 Conclusion 
Anucchedas 339-340 
