+++
title = "339"
+++
The Confidentiality of Spiritual Realization 
३३९ । तत्र ते भक्तिमार्गा दर्शिताः । अत्र च श्रीगुरोः श्रीभगवतो वा प्रसादलब्धं साधनसाध्यगतं स्वीयसर्वस्वभूतं यत् किमपि रहस्यं तत् तु न कस्मैचित् प्रकाशनीयम् । 
THE PATH OF DEVOTION as a whole has thus been outlined in this book. If by the mercy obtained from Sri Guru or Śrī Bhagavān, one has realized some confidential truth (rahasya) that has become one's very existence, whether regarding the practice (sādhana) or the goal (sadhya) of devotion, it should not be disclosed to anybody. 
1 
यथाह (भा० ८।१७।२० ) - 
As Śrī Visnu told Aditi Devi: 
नैतत् परस्मा आख्येयं पृष्टयापि कथञ्चन । 
सर्वं सम्पद्यते देवि देवगुह्यं सुसंवृतम् ॥ १०७२ ॥ 
O goddess, never reveal this matter to anyone even if requested. All that is hidden to the devas becomes successful when properly concealed. (SB 8.17.20 ) 1 
सम्पद्यते फलदं भवति ॥ श्रीविष्णुरदितिम् ॥ 
The verb sampadyate, "becomes successful," means that it "bears fruit" (phaladam bhavati). 
naitat parasma akhyeyaṁ prstayāpi kathañcana 
sarvam sampadyate devi deva-guhyam su-samvrtam 
773 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
Commentary 
SRI JIVA GOSVAMI brings his discussion on bhakti to a close with some important advice. This instruction is especially relevant in modern times when people are prone to advertise everything about themselves. Nothing is kept secret in the internet age. Even in applying for a job, people need to write about each of their achievements to impress their would-be employer. They must praise themselves and possibly exaggerate their accomplishments. 
In former times, it was considered impolite in Vedic culture to speak about oneself. To praise oneself meant that one's piety was lost. Now it is a compulsive art. One's success depends not only on one's qualifications but also on how well one can promote oneself. Many people even make a profession out of teaching this art. 
Nowadays, in this age of information technology, it is not easy to keep secrets. It is hard to know who is observing and recording your actions. There may be hidden cameras around or someone spying on you from afar. Whatever one writes, says, or does may be made available to millions of people without one's notice or 
consent. 
It may be necessary to broadcast one's credentials in worldly life, but as regards spiritual matters, one should keep one's realizations to oneself. The very meaning of the word mantra is "that which is kept secret." In this regard, Hari-bhakti-viläsa offers the following advice: "One should keep one's worshipable deity, one's guru, one's dikṣā-mantra, and one's japa-mala secret" (Hari-bhaktiviläsa 2.147)? 
Similar statements are found elsewhere in the same book. Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī says that realizations related to one's sadhana and sadhya should be kept secret. It is important to recognize this principle, because at present most people are not aware of it. 
2 
One may question: Why should one's mantra, guru, deity, and mālā be kept secret? The reason for this is that one's success on the 
gopayed devatam istam gopayed gurum atmanah 
gopayec ca nijam mantram gopayen nija-malikām 
774 
339 The Confidentiality of Spiritual Realization 
spiritual path very much depends upon one's śraddha in one's guru, mantra, deity, and the process. In the Gita, Śrī Kṛṣṇa says that a person endowed with faith attains wisdom (4.39), and one devoid of śraddha is lost (4.40). If one's mantra and so on are revealed to others, there is a possibility of losing faith in them because of remarks made by those who are either not following any spiritual path or who belong to another that espouses contrary views. 
Faithless materialists may deride or minimize the process or the goal of sadhakas. They may present various arguments to support their opinions for which sadhakas may have no answer. The practitioners may be harboring doubts within, and these arguments may activate their doubts. Those who follow some other path, such as the jñāna-marga, may also make negative remarks about the process of bhakti, even citing scriptures to prove their point. All this may weaken one's śraddha. One may conclude that one's mantra or process is not anything special. 
Alternatively, one may feel proud of one's mantra, process, or progress. This may give rise to arguments, disrespect, and offenses. Pride is one of the biggest obstacles in bhakti. To teach ordinary sādhakas a lesson about the need to abandon pride, Krsna disappeared from the rasa-lila when He sensed a semblance of pride in the gopis because of their feeling exceedingly fortunate to be in His company (saubhaga-madam, SB 10.29.48). Although there is no possibility of pride in liberated associates like the gopis, yet this example is given for our benefit. 
Related to the topic of pride, Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti says that there are four types of anarthas, or defilements, on the path of bhakti. One of them is the anartha arising out of bhakti itself, meaning the pride in one's accomplishments. If one reveals one's practice or progress to others, then some people may become impressed and start honoring the devotee, which can lead to falldown. One's success depends on one's faith in one's mantra, guru, and deity. This is affirmed in Pañcatantra: "One's success related to a mantra, a holy place, a brahmana, a deity, an astrologer, a doctor, and a guru is in accordance with one's faith in them" (Pañcatantra 5.96). 
3 
mantre tirthe dvije deve daivajne bhesaje gurau →→ 
775 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
Therefore, one needs to protect that faith by all means. In the same vein, if one has some experience, he should not reveal it to others except to his guru. 
In this regard, I read a story in a Hindi commentary on the famous book called Bhakta-mala of Nabha Dasa. There was a king who had a very religious queen. The queen always spent her time in devotional acts, such as worship, kirtana, and listening to devotional literature. Her only sadness was that although her husband supported and facilitated all her practices, he himself never participated in them. He would not even utter the name of Kṛṣṇa. The queen tried to convince him to chant, but the king would not comply. He would just smile and go away. Many years passed like this, but the queen was unsuccessful in convincing the king to join her in devotional practices. This made her very sad. 
Then one morning, the king noticed that the queen was very happy and jovial. She was buzzing around and ordering the employees of the palace to decorate the whole palace. She ordered the cooks to prepare a big feast. The musicians were called to come and sing. The king thought that it must be some festival day. But he could not think of what it might be. Being curious, he asked the queen the cause of her celebrations. The queen replied that it was the most festive day of her life. The king inquired further about the special occasion because he could not think of any festival that fell on that date. The queen said that her wish had been granted. The king became even more curious to discover what wish she was talking about. The queen then revealed that at night during his sleep, the king had uttered the name of Krsna. This is what had made her so happy. When the king heard this, he collapsed on the ground while declaring, "O God, my secret is out!" 
776 
yadrsi bhavana yasya siddhir bhavati tadrsi 
