+++
title = "01 GENERAL THEMES"
+++
SECTION-I   \
GENERAL THEMES OF THE TEMPLE SCULPTURES AND VAISHNAVITE TRADITIONS. 

A Hindu temple is always conceived as a miniature universe revolving around the creator who is represented by the presiding deity within the garbhagriha. Hence the temple precincts normally display all the various facets of the universe like the animals, trees and planets, human beings and their various forms, demi gods, kinnaras, gandharvas, the nadi devatas, the vana devatas etc. etc. Hence in a Hindu temple almost all the aspects of the panorama of life with its variegated changing patterns are represented in the sculptured panels. 

The temple of Tirumala is no exception to this rule. Since in a Vishnu temple, the major theme is the various forms and avataras of Lord Vishnu, these have repeatedly been shown in the sculptures of this temple. Various forms of Narasimha, well known scenes from the Ramayana, the Krishna Leela scenes, scenes from the legends connected with the Dashavataras, and a host of other connected vaishnava themes and legends, are all represented in the sculptures of the various pillars of the Tirumala temple. Among the various forms of Vishnu, Narasimha and Varaha became extremely popular under the Guptas, the Cholas, and the Palivas and other dynasties and this tradition is continued right till today. Hence at the Tirumala temple there is a separate shrine for the Varaha avatara, which is also called Gnanappiran by the great vaishnavite alvar teachers. There are separate shrines for Yoga Narasimha at Tirumala and for Laxmi Narasimha at Alvar Tirtham. These forms are also repeatedly found as vimana devatas and gopura devatas in accordance with the rules laid down in the Agamas. 

Similarly the Ramayana story which has influenced Indian life and culture for well over 2000 years, is also well represented in this temple. There are separate shrines for the utsava murtis of Rama, Laxmana and Sita at Tirumala. During the Vijayanagara period, bhakti towards Hanuman reached a new height. This Lord became so popular that he came to be worshipped as Panchamukha Hanuman and these are also represented in the sculptures of the Govindarajaswamy temple. 

If at all any one particular vaishnavite theme or legend can be said to be the most dominating and popular in the Tirumala temple, it is the story of Krishna as depicted in the Bhagavata. The legends connected with the Krishna avatara provide as much scope for the sculptor as for the poet. Rural scenes like living quarters of the shepherds, the day to day life of gopikas, the milking of cow or churning of butter-milk, playful scenes of the Lord as a child, are all depicted true to the popular Indian tradition and culture of a rural atmosphere. 

Other agamic aspects of Lord Vishnu, such as Hayagriva, Adimurti, Varadaraja and Srinivasa are also well represented. The holy weapon of the Lord, Chakra is worshipped in a separate shrine as Sudarshana chakra and some powerful representations of this are found at Tirumala. 

Also in accordance with Sri Vaishnava tenets, great importance is given to Sri or Laxmi in this temple. According to Ramanuja who laid down the basic tenets of Vaishnava worship, which are known as Sri Vaishnavism or Sri Sampradaya, Sri or Laxmi is the Supreme goddess who pleads like a mother with the Lord of the universe to shower his grace on his devotees, since she being the universal mother, is the very embodiment of compassion. This aspect of the mother, and the reverence and affection with which she is held by the devotees, is brought out in the well known suprabhatham of which one verse is given below: 

“O' Mother of all the worlds! You dwell permanently at the Vaksha- sthala of Lord Vishnu who destroyed the demons Madhu and Kaitapa; you are the beloved of supreme Lord Venkatesvara; You with effulgent divine beauty are our eternal mother; You grant all the wishes of your devotees; O' supreme consort of the supreme Lord Venkatesvara, may the awakening (suprabhatam) be an auspicious one to you.” 

Another peculiarity of Sri Vaishnava temples is the existence of a separate place of worship and honour to the alvars and the acharyas of whom the famous saint andal is one. There is a temple of andal in the Govindaraja swamy temple. The Amuktamalyada of Krishnadevaraya pays special homage to her. Her soul-stirring compositions of Tiruppavai are still sung every day in the shrine of Tirumala. Her divine marriage with the Lord of the universe is an important festival held on the Panguni-uttiram day. 

The saints of Sri Vaishnava tradition are called divya suris. Their com- positions are divyaprabhandas and the places prescribed by them are divya desas. Tirumala is a divyadesa, since all the saints have poured out the devotion of their hearts in exquisitic poetry to the Lord of Vengadam. In the Tirumala temple though there are no separate shrines to them, they are all represented by sculptures on the pillars and their hyms are also regularly sung. 

In consonance with the tradition of the Ramanuja school of thought, there is in the temple of Tirumala a shrine for Ramanuja the apostle of Sri Vaishnavism. 

Another special feature of Sri Vishnu temples is the importance given to Vishvaksena, ananta, and garuda. Vishvaksena whom the Sri Vaishnavites call by the name Senaiyarkon is the custodian of the household of the Lord and occupies an important place in the Acharya parampara line. His icon is found in the temple of Tirumala. Similarly, Ananta the divine couch of the Lord and Garuda the divine vahana are constant attendants of the Lord. Sculptures of Garuda can be seen almost everywhere in the temple. Similarly, sculptures of the ashtadikpalakas like Indra, Varuna, Kubera, Agni etc., vidyadharas, apsaras etc., shankhanidhi and padmanidhi two of the navanidhis of Kubera the Lord of Wealth, kamadhenu, gajendra, simha, hamsa, kalpalatika etc., are all seen in the Tirumala temple. 

The sanctity of the temple is so great that it is said that Siddhas and Yogis and Rishis who have attained great spiritual heights, as well as emperors and ordinary folk are present in the temple premises waiting to worship the Lord. These ideas have been fully brought out in this famous verse of Tiruppan alvar. 

