+++
title = "141"
+++
Bhakti Bestows Love for Bhagavān
१४१ । श्रीभगवद्विषयकरतिप्रदत्वमुक्तम् “ एवं निर्जितषड्वर्गैः क्रियते भक्तिरीश्वरे” (भा० ७।७।३३) इत्यादिना ।
THE FACT that bhakti bestows love (rati) for Śrī Bhagavan was mentioned earlier [Anuccheda 57], on the basis of Prahlada's
statement:
Bhakti unto Isvara is enacted in this manner by those who have vanquished the six enemies in the form of lust, anger, and so on, by which [sādhana-bhakti] love (rati) for Bhagavan Vasudeva is attained. (sB 7.7.33 ) 1
यत् तु "अस्त्वेवमङ्ग भजतां भगवान् मुकुन्दो मुक्तिं ददाति कर्हिचित् स्म न भक्तियोगम्” ( भा० ५।६।१८) इत्युक्त्यापि तद्रतिर्न प्राप्यत इति शङ्क्यते तत् खल्वविवेकादेव । कर्हिचिदिति भक्तियोगाख्यतद्रतिपुरुषार्थतायां शैथिल्ये सत्येवेत्यर्थलाभात् कर्हिचिदपीत्यनुक्तत्वात् “असाकल्ये तु चिच्चनौ” इत्यमरकोषाच् च ।
I
A doubt may be raised, however, that according to the following statement, one may not be able to obtain love (rati) for Bhagavān:
1
My dear King, in spite of this, however, Bhagavan Mukunda awards liberation to those who render service to Him, but
evam nirjita-sad-vargaiḥ kriyate bhaktir isvare
vasudeve bhagavati yayd samlabhyate ratiḥ
821I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
He never (na karhicit) grants bhakti-yoga [i.e., prema-bhakti].3 (SB 5.6.18)+
This doubt can arise only due to a lack of critical examination of this verse, on the following grounds. First of all, the word karhicit, "sometimes," should be understood here to mean "specifically when there is laxity in regard to the attainment of divine love (rati), referred to here as bhakti-yoga, which is the ultimate end to be attained (puruṣārthata)." Secondly, there is no use of the emphatic particle api connected with karhicit, [which would have rendered the sense, "He does not give rati at any time at all" (karhicid api); since this is not said, "sometimes" is the intended meaning]. Finally, according to the Amara-kosa (3.4.3) lexicon, the suffixes cit and cana are used to lend a sense of incompleteness to the word to which they are affixed.
तथापि यद्यपि चिरमावृत्तिः स्यात् तदा रतिमपि ददाति "सत्यं दिशत्यर्थितमर्थितो नृणाम्” ( भा० ५।१९।२७) इत्यादेरिति च कर्हिचित्पदेन गम्यते ।
In spite of the fact that Bhagavan does not award rati when there
2
The word karhicit means "sometimes." When combined with the negative particle na, it generally carries the sense of "not at any time" or "never." Śrī Jiva is clarifying that this meaning should not be taken here. Rather, the negative particle should be joined instead to the verb dadati. Thus, the meaning becomes: "Sometimes, Bhagavan Mukunda does not grant bhakti-yoga" [i.e., rati, or "the first dawning of divine love"], implying that sometimes He does grant rati. Śrī Jiva will next specify the circumstances under which Bhagavan withholds rati from His worshipers. The verse has been translated in the standard fashion to show the contrast with Sri Jiva's subsequent clarification of the verse's true
intent.
* This is Sridhara Svami's gloss on the word bhakti-yoga.
  4
  5
  astv evam anga bhajatam bhagavan mukundo
  muktim dadāti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam
  On its own, the word karhi means "when." By addition of the suffix cit, which lends a sense of incompleteness or indefiniteness to the original word, the meaning becomes "at some time." When combined with the negative particle na, the sense would be "not at some time." By quoting the Amara-kosa statement regarding the suffix cit, Sri Jiva is making the point that it would be incorrect to interpret na karhicit as "not at any time whatsoever," or "never," because that would imply completeness of the negation in regard to all time. For this and the other two reasons stated, it is thus concluded that the verse means. "Sometimes Bhagavan does not award love to those who worship Him."
  822
  141 Bhakti Bestows Love for Bhagavan
  is laxity in regard to the goal, if the devotee continues to perform bhakti for a long time, Bhagavan eventually does bestow love for Him upon such a devotee. This is the implication of the word karhicit used in the verse, which is corroborated by the following statement:
  It is true that Bhagavan, when prayed to by human beings, awards the results that they seek. [Yet by doing so,] He does not offer anything of genuine value, because [after the petitioners have enjoyed their rewards,] they again pray for something new. [Recognizing this pattern,] Bhagavan personally offers His own lotus feet to those who worship Him, even though they don't aspire for them, and this brings an end to their material desires. (SB 5.19.27)
  भक्तविषयकभगवत्प्रीत्येकहेतुत्वमप्युदाहृतम् "नालं द्विजत्वं देवत्वम्” (भा० ७/७/५१)
  इत्यादि ।
  The fact that bhakti is the only cause that impels Bhagavan's love for His devotees is illustrated by the following statement of Prahlada:
  O sons of the asuras, being a member of the twice-born class, a deva, a sage, a person of virtuous conduct, or a great scholar, are all inadequate to be a source of pleasure for Bhagavan Mukunda. Bhagavan Hari is pleased only by untainted devotion, not by charity, penance, worship, purity, or vows. Without devotion, everything else is merely a show. (SB 7.7.51-52)
  तथा चाह (भा० ७ १९१९ ) -
  Prahlada also expressed the same idea to Bhagavan Nrsimhadeva:
  satyam disaty arthitam arthito nṛṇam naivarthado yat punar arthita yataḥ svayam vidhatte bhajatām anicchatam icchāpidhānam nija-pada-pallavam
  "nālam dvijatvam devatvam ṛsitvam vāsur ātmajāḥ
  prinanaya mukundasya na vṛttam na bahu-jñatā na dānam na tapo nejya na saucam na vratani ca priyate'malaya bhaktyā harir anyad viḍambanam See Anuccheda 168 for elaboration of this verse.
  823
  I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
  मन्ये धनाभिजनरूपतपःश्रुतौजस्तेजःप्रभावबलपौरुषबुद्धियोगाः । नाराधनाय हि भवन्ति परस्य पुंसो भक्त्या तुतोष भगवान् गजयूथपाय ॥
  ३७८ ।।
  It is my conviction that wealth, nobility, beauty, austerity, erudition, sensory prowess, physical power, influence, bodily strength, industriousness, intelligence, and the culture of yoga, are unable to give pleasure to the Supreme Person. [This is so,] because Bhagavan was pleased with the elephant Gajendra, [who possessed none of these qualities,] simply because of his devotion. (SB 7.9.9)$
  अभिजनः सत्कुलजन्म । बुद्धिर्ज्ञानयोगः । योगोऽष्टाङ्गः ॥ प्रह्लादः श्रीनृसिंहदेवम् ॥
  The word abhijanah, "nobility," means "birth in a pious family" (sat-kula-janma). The word buddhi, "intelligence," means "proficiency in jñāna-yoga." And yoga refers to the eightfold path of yoga (aṣṭānga-yoga).
  Commentary
  ACCORDING to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmi, there are three stages of bhakti; namely, sadhana (the practice stage), bhāva (the first dawning of divine love), and prema-bhakti (the mature state of divine love). A practitioner begins with sadhana-bhakti, which matures into bhava-bhakti, which in turn is the precursor to prema-bhakti. Therefore, when Śrī Jīva says that bhakti bestows rati, he means that sadhana-bhakti matures into rati, which is another name for bhāva-bhakti.
  Śrī Jīva raises a doubt in this regard. He refers to a verse by Sukadeva (SB 5.6.18), which seems to say that Krsna awards mukti to those who worship Him, but never bhakti-yoga. Śrī Jīva specifies the word bhakti-yoga here as rati, referring to bhava-bhakti among
  manye dhanabhijana-rupa-tapah-śrutaujastejaḥ-prabhava-bala-paurusa-buddhi-yogaḥ närādhanaya hi bhavanti parasya puṁso bhaktyä tutoṣa bhagavan gaja-yutha-pāya
  824
  141 Bhakti Bestows Love for Bhagavan
  the above-mentioned three stages. He points out, however, that the interpretation in question arises out of a misunderstanding of the word karhicit, "sometimes," as elaborated below.
  In Sanskrit, the idea of "never" is generally expressed by the words na karhicit, na kadācit, and so on. To apply this meaning here, however, would betray a lack of critical examination (aviveka), since the circumstance - lit., "the sometime" (kadacit) - when Bhagavan awards liberation and not rati, is specifically when there is laxity in regard to the attainment of such rati. At other times, when laxity is altogether absent, Bhagavan does indeed award rati. So, rather than meaning that Krsna never bestows rati, the statement means that He does not always award it.
  Śrī Jiva argues further that if Sukadeva truly intended to say that Bhagavan "never" bestows rati, he would have added the indeclinable api to the word karhicit, which would then mean "not at any time at all." Since he did not do so, it is understood that what he meant was that sometimes Bhagavan does not award rati. Śri Jiva adds that Bhagavan eventually does award rati even to the practitioner who was initially lax in his devotion, if he continues to perform bhakti for a long period of time, thus overcoming his laxity.
  This topic is addressed by Rūpa Gosvāmī in Bhakti-rasāmṛtasindhu, under the heading of bhakti's quality of being rarely attained (sudurlabha). In this regard, he makes the following point:
  Bhakti is very difficult to attain for two reasons. First of all, bhakti is unattainable even after a long time by an abundance of devotional acts undertaken without genuine attachment to Krsna. Secondly, bhakti is not awarded very quickly by Kṛṣṇa [even if it is performed with such attachment]? (BRS 1.1.35)10
  Alternatively, if the negative particle na is syntactically connected to the word mukti instead, the verse would mean that to
  9
  This bracketed insert is taken from Jiva Gosvāmi's own Durgama-sangamani commentary on the verse.
  10 sadhanaughair anäsangair alabhya sucirad api
  harina cāśv adeyeti dvidha sa syat sudurlabha
  825
  I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
  those engaged in the exclusive worship of Bhagavan, He never grants mukti but only bhakti (bhakti-yogam dadāti, muktim na karhicit). According to the logistics of Sanskrit sentence analysis, it is not compulsory that na must be applied to the word bhaktiyogam just because it immediately precedes it. It is a question of intonation.
  The point is: Why would Bhagavan award mukti to His devotees? He affirms in the Gita (4.11) that He rewards different practitioners in precise correspondence with their bhāva. So it would make no sense for Him to award mukti to His pure devotees. It was pointed out in the previous anuccheda (140) that a devotee does not desire even any of the four types of personal liberation. It was also stated earlier that bhakti is a confidential mystery (rahasya). In keeping with this understanding, the real meaning of Sukadeva's statement has been concealed by placing na before bhakti-yogam so that unqualified seekers will not concern themselves with bhakti.
  To confirm the fact that Bhagavan does indeed award rati to His devotees, Śrī Jiva quotes another verse from the Fifth Canto (SB 5.19.27), which states that Bhagavan sometimes grants bhakti even to those who do not request it. This verse was discussed earlier in Anuccheda 98.
  Śrī Jiva concludes the anuccheda by citing two statements from Śrī Prahlada to illustrate that Bhagavan is pleased only by bhakti and not by anything else. When He is pleased with the devotee's bhakti, He bestows love, or rati, upon His devotee.
  826
