+++
title = "162"
+++
Ajāmila's Sins Destroyed from His First Utterance of the Name
१६२ । अत एवाजामिलस्यान्यदापि पुत्रोपचारितं नारायणनाम गृह्णतः—
प्रयाणे चाप्रयाणे च यन्नामस्मरणान् नृणाम् ।
सद्यो नश्यति पापौघो नमस्तस्मै चिदात्मने ॥ ४५२ ॥
इति पाद्मे देवद्युतिस्तुत्यनुसारेण “ज्वरमरणदशायामपि सकलकश्मलनिरसनानि तव गुणकृतनामधेयानि ” ( भा० ५।३।१२) इति पञ्चमोक्तगद्यस्थितापिशब्देन प्रथमनामग्रहणादेव क्षीणसर्वपापस्यापि मरणे यन्नामग्रहणं तत्प्रशंसैव श्रूयते ।
IT SHOULD thus be understood that Ajamila uttered the name Nārāyāṇa, not only at the time of death, but at other times throughout his life while calling for his son. In reality, all of Ajāmila's sins were destroyed from the very first utterance of the name. This conclusion is in accordance with the prayers of Devadyuti cited from the Padma Purāṇa:
I offer obeisance unto Bhagavan, who is of the essence of consciousness alone (cit-ātmā). Simply by remembering His name, whether at the time of death or while living, all sins of human beings are immediately destroyed. (Padma Purana, Uttara-khanda 128.238)1
1
prayāṇe caprayane ca yan-nama-smaraṇān nṛṇām
sadyo nasyati papaugho namas tasmai cid-atmane
948
162 Ajamila's Sins Destroyed from His First Utterance of the Name
The same thing is confirmed by use of the word api, "even," in this prose statement from the Fifth Canto of Srimad Bhāgavata: "Even in a state of fever or even at the time of death, Your names, which are indicative of Your qualities, destroy all sins" (SB 5.3.12)2
So even though Ajamila was freed from all sins from his very first utterance of the name, it is his articulation of the name at the time of death that is specifically extolled.
तत्राप्यावृत्त्या (भा० ६।२।१३ ) -
In this regard, it is by repetition (āvṛtti) [of the name throughout his life that Ajamila was able to utter the name at the time of death], as indicated in the Viṣṇudutas' statement to the Yamadūtas:
अथैनं मापनयत कृताशेषाघनिष्कृतिम् ।
यदसौ भगवन्नाम म्रियमाणः समग्रहीत् ॥ ४५३ ॥
Therefore, O Yamadūtas, do not take away this man, who has already atoned for his sins without remainder (aśeşa), because he has perfectly articulated the name of Bhagavan while dying. (SB 6.2.13)3
अशेषशब्दोऽत्र वासनापर्यन्तः । अघशब्दश्चापराधपर्यन्त इति । अत्र मरणे सर्वेषां दैन्योदयोऽपि श्रीभगवत्कृपातिशयद्वारमिति द्रष्टव्यम् ॥ श्रीविष्णुदूता यमदूतान् ॥
The word aśeșa, "without remainder," [qualifying the word "sins" (agha)], means that even his predispositions (vāsanās) toward sinful action were eradicated. The word agha, “sins," should be understood to include even his offenses [which are the cause of further sin]. Moreover, it is to be noted that at the time of death, everyone is overcome with a feeling of humility and that this is the gateway to receive Bhagavan's abundant
grace.
...jvara-maraṇa-daśāyām api sakala-kasmala-nirasanāni tava guna-kṛta-nämadheyāni...
athainaṁ mapanayata kṛtaseṣāgha-niskṛtim
yad asau bhagavan-nāma mriyamāṇaḥ samagrahit
949Commentary
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
AJĀMILA named his youngest son Nārāyaṇa. Therefore, he must have called him by name hundreds of times previously, thus incidentally uttering the name of Bhagavan Nārāyaṇa. In fact, he became free of sin from the moment he called out his son's name for the first time. This is indicated by use of the past perfect tense (vyäjahāra and jagada) in the Viṣṇudutas' following statement regarding Ajamila's utterance of the name:
This man [Ajamila] has certainly atoned for sins committed not only in this life but even in thousands of previous lives as well, because, although in a helpless state, he uttered (vyajahāra) the name of Hari, which is the means to all auspiciousness [i.e., the means even to liberation and not mere atonement]. When [at the time of calling his son] he uttered (jagada) the four-syllable name, "Nārāyaṇa come here," this sinner certainly completed the atonement for all his sins. (SB 6.2.7-8)+
Here, Ajāmila's utterance of the name does not refer only to the name he spoke while dying, but to his very first act of calling for his son. This is understood from the past perfect tense, which is used when the speaker did not witness the act. In SB 6.2.7, the word vivasa, literally, "helpless," would then refer not to his condition at the time of death but to the affection that bound him to his son. So, in fact it was not even necessary for him to utter the name at the time of death. He would still have been protected from the Yamadūtas even without uttering it at that time.
Some may argue that although Ajamila became free from sins when he spoke the name Nārāyaṇa for the first time, he continued to commit further sins thereafter. In this manner, each new sin would be washed off by the subsequent utterance of the name. According to this view, it is conjectured that Ajamila needed to chant the holy name again at the moment of death just to clear away
4
ayam hi kṛta-nirveso janma-koty-amhasam api
yad-vyajahāra vivaso nama svasty-ayanam hareḥ etenaiva hy aghono'sya krtam syad agha-niskṛtam yadā nārāyaṇāyeti jagada catur-aksaram
950
162 Ajamila's Sins Destroyed from His First Utterance of the Name
any sins that had accumulated after his last utterance. This explanation is unacceptable, because there are statements affirming that even future sins are burned by chanting the name even just once. One such statement is as follows:
All sins committed at present, in the past, and in the future as well are immediately burned by the fire of singing Govinda's name. (Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.339)
In the same context, the use of the particle api, "even," in SB 5.3.12 is significant. The sense is that if the name destroys all sins "even" in a state of delirium or great tribulation, in which the mind cannot possibly be focused, it undoubtedly destroys all sins at any time, under all circumstances. So, although Ajamila's sins were destroyed from his very first utterance of the name, it is the name he chanted at the time of death that is specifically extolled. That he was able to articulate the name at the time of death, however, was only because he had repeated it throughout his life and was thus already free from all sins. It is on the basis of this inference that Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī cites SB 6.2.13 as an example of praise for repetition of the name, although the verse refers only to Ajamila's reciting the name at the time of death.
Here a doubt may be raised. If Ajamila became free of sins after uttering "Nārāyana" for the very first time, why did he not forsake everything and engage in bhakti, as he did after seeing the Viṣṇudutas? Furthermore, why did he continue to sin? Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti replies that he continued to act sinfully because of his past saṁskāras, just as a person who attains to the liberated status while living, jīvan-mukta, continues to live and act according to his previous samskāras. Kings like Janaka were liberated but continued to rule. They were not implicated in any karma, meritorious or unmeritorious. In a similar manner, Ajamila continued his sinful life, but he was not affected by it. His sinful deeds were like the bite of a snake that has been defanged.
vartamanaṁ tu yat papam yad bhutam yad bhavisyati tat sarvam nirdahaty asu govindanala-kirtanāt
951
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
Śrī Jīva extracts one more important point from the story of Ajāmila. The moment of death engenders a state of humility, which is highly conducive to elicit the grace of Bhagavan. For this reason, chanting the name at the time of death has a special effect. When we chant at other times, our ego of independent doership tends to remain intact, and thus we may not chant in absolute humility. At the time of death, however, the entire foundation of the psyche collapses. We must then face the stark reality that our body, mind, ego, relations, and possessions cannot help us.
952
