+++
title = "08 STHALAPURANA, LEGENDS"
+++
THE STHALAPURANA OF TIRUMALA AND OTHER LEGENDS 


### (i) Introduction. 

THE sthala mahatmyam of the temple of Sri Venkatesvara is called "Sri Venkatachala Mahatmyam.' This is mentioned in several puranas like Varaha purana, Padma purana, Garuda purana, Brahma purana, Markandeya purana, Vamana purana, Brahmottara purana, Khanda purana, Aditya purana, Bhavishyottara purana and Harivamsa. Of these, the most important are the Varaha purana and Bhavishyottara purana. 

There are other innumerable collections of legends and stories about Tirumala and about the presiding God Sri Venkatesvara or Srinivasa. An inscription from Tirumala mentions a Venkatachala Mahatmyam that was being recited in the temple before the Lord. It is not possible to say if this work is the same as Sri Venkatachala Mahatmyam which is now available in print as the stala purana of the temple. 

Most of the incidents in the sthalapurana describe the sanctity and the greatness of the Hills of Tirumala and of the numerous tirthas situated on them. 


### (ii) Author of the sthala purana etc. 

The sthala purana was compiled by a certain Pasindi Venkatatturaivar alias Jiyar Ramanujayyan who lived in Tirupati during the last quarter of the 15th century, for, a record (No. 253-T.T.) of his charity in Sri Venkatesvara temple dated in the Saka year 1413, cyclic year Virodhikrit, on the 7th lunar day of the dark fortnight of the Mithuna`month, being a Monday combined with the star Uttirattadi or Uttarabhadra, équivalent to the 27th June 1491 A.d., registers an implied sufferance of the authorities of the temple for reading, at a tiruvolakkam (asthanam or levee) in the presence of the deity, “ the Tiruvenkata-Mahatmyam compiled and humbly presented by him,” during one of the days of the Adhyayanotsavam conducted in the month of Margali for Tįruvenkata- mudaiyan at Tirumala, to wit, on the day of the repairing of the path-way to the waterfall Akasaganga, from which water is daily brought to the temple for His ablutions and other rites of worship. 

This is the earliest reference that we get, in the inscriptions, to the “Tiruvenkata-Mahatmyam,” and it is explicitly mentioned that it was "humbly presented" by Pasindi Venkatatturaivar. Consequently we may take it that the piecing together of the pertinent extracts from the twelve different Puranas by Pasindi Venkatatturaivar, together with additions of his own, based on the mangalasasanams (adulatory verses) of the Alvars or Tamil Vaishnavaite Saints who sang in praise of God Venkatesa, was completed on or before the Saka year 1413, Virodhikrit, že., 1491 A.D.And it is possible that the "Tiruvenkata-Mahatmyam" mentioned in the epigraph is the same work as the present “ Venkatachala-Mahatmya " published by the Devasthanam and as such formed the original of the Devasthanam publication. 

This " 'Venkatachala-Mahatmya was first published in book form in Telugu script in 1884 A.D., by the Devasthanam under the authority of His Holiness the late Sri Mahant Bhagavandasaji, the then Vicharanakarta, and republished, with the omission of extraneous matter, in 1896 by his grand- disciple the late Sri Mahant Ramakisoradasaji and reprinted in 1928 by the latter's disciple, His Holiness Sri Mahant Prayagdasaji, the last Vicharana- karta of the Devasthanams. Meanwhile two Devanagari editions of the “Mahatmya” were also issued, the second of which was in 1904. Since then a Hindi rendering of it was brought out in 1930. 

It is this compilation which goes by the name of “Sri Venkatachala- Mahatmya." It commences with an account of the Varaha-kalpa as given in the Varahapurana delineating the Sveta-Varaha-avatara, for the double reason that this kalpa witnessed the origin of the mundane world and that God Sveta-Varaha chose this hill for His dwelling ever since his rescuing the earth from the patalaloka, for which cause both the hill and the surrounding country have come to be known as the Varaha-kshetra. 

175 


### (iii) The story of Sveta varaha kalpa. 

The sthala purana mentions a conference of all rishis and munis at Naimisaranya, where Suta, the apara vedavyasa was asked to describe to the assembled saints the pre-eminent place among the kshetras sacred to Lord Vishnu. Suta related to them the story of such a kshetra wherein the Lord performed the various kridas and also the incidents of His life connected with the varaha kalpa viz., Seshachala. The hill is described there as a sacred place which possesses the powers of causing the realisation of all desires and as capable of bestowing immense prosperity on men. The story given is as follows: 

At one time the oceanic waters swelled and enwrapped the earth deep. That was Kalpadi (the beginning of the aeon) when Vishnu was lying supine on a banyan leaf as Vatapatrasayi in the Maharloka. For a thousand yugas the water did not recede and the omnipotent Vishnu bethought Himself of re-creation. 

The Munis desired to know in detail as to how Pralayakalpa (the great deluge) occurred, how and wherefrom such a large quantity of water arose and where the earth and the mountains then lay; and, in compliance thereof, Suta explained thus:--- 

One thousand chatur-yugas make a day for Brahma and the same a night. At the end of such two thousand chatur-yugas, Sun vomited fire through his rays and there was no rain for years together. Men and tapo- dhanas (i.e., munis), living on earth at the time, forsook it and took their abode in the janaloka at the approach of night, when the forests and mountains were consumed by fire and reduced to ashes. Then Vayu (wind) blew furiously for some long years and big clouds formed and rained in torrents without intermission. The earth melted and sank down to the patalatala. Then the sapta-sagaras (seven oceans), joining together, rose up to the maharloka as one expanse of water, and so remained for a thousand yugas during a part of that night of Brahma. Immediately past midnight, Vishnu, the Creator, Protector and Destroyer, determined to rescue the earth-an act impossible of accomplishment by Brahma and Siva-and so went in search of it into the Patalaloka in the form of Sveta-Varaha(white Boar). There ensued a frightful encounter with Hiranyaksha which by and bypassed into a malla-yuddha (wrestling contest) lasting for a long time. Sveta-Varaha, becoming infuriated, tore the huge body of the demon, which was as big as Mount Meru, in twain with His tusks, and the demon's blood, mixing up with the water, caused it to turn red. The munis of the janaloka, noticing the redness, perceived from their supernatural powers of samadhi, dhyana and yaga that this terrifying feat was performed only by Varaha whom they praised from their own residence. Sveta-Varaha whom they praised then slashed the water and brought up the Earth on His tusks, and, placing one foot on Adisesha, stood up in the janaloka like a huge mountain. Presently Brahma and the Deva- ganas, Siddhas and Paramarshis extolled Him with the chanting of the Veda- mantras; simultaneously were showered flowers; Apsaras danced; devadun- dubhi, vina, muraja and mardala were heard to have been played. And they all praised Varaha as the skilful slayer of Hiranyaksha and as the Supreme God, and prayed to Him to establish the Earth firmly as herebefore. 

• 

This is the thirty-third Chapter of “Sri Varaha Purana” describing Sveta-Varaha's slaying Hiranyaksha, and forms the first Chapter of “Sri Venkatachala-Mahatmya." 


### (iv) Fetching Kridachala from Vaikuntha by Garuda. 

Varaha fixed the Earth and delimited the sapta-sagaras and the sapta-lokas as formerly. He next called on Brahma and bid Him create the jagat as before; and accordingly Chaturmukha created the Sun and Moon as previously. Dhara-Varaha longed to reside on Earth for a time in order to protect the people and so commanded Garuda to bring from Vaikuntha the Kridachala together with the parishat (divine assembly) and the Suras headed by Vishvaksena. Soon afterwards Garuda started to bring the Kridachala, and Hari, in the incarnation of the Boar, having established the Earth, eagerly waited for the arrival of Garuda, selecting a sacred spot which was sixty yojanas (600 miles) south of the Gomati and five yojanas west of the eastern sea and adjoined the Rukmanadi (Svarnamukhi river) on its north; and which also formed the abode of the Punya-janas (holy people). 

Starting under command of Bhu-Varaha, Garuda reached and espied the Kridachala, an extensive natural hill, consisting of precious stones and gold, containing lofty peaks and appearing in the form of Panchopanishat. It was found to be resplendent with tall trees growing both on heaven and earth and plants and shrubs of sweet scented flowers; ever resounding with the melody of the singing birds; abounding in wild beasts; inhabited by Kinnaras and Kinnaris singing incessantly; filled with delightful streamlets; and adored by Muktas, Nityas, Kamarupas and Namarupas. Being known as Narayana- giri, it served as the sporting hill of Parameshthi (God). In extent it was three yojanas wide and thirty yojanas long and in shape resembled Sesha, It was a fit place to receive the saviour of humanity. It formed the conch of Hari and was a coveted place for all beings. Excellent in form, it bestowed great merit and afforded Moksha even to its devoted visitors. 

Carrying that stupendous hill on his shoulders with all the divine servants in it, Garuda flew back to Varaha. Varaha asked him to deposit at the place, and, getting on it, stood as Sveta-Varaha within the pure and divine Vimana-shining with many gopuras set with different kinds of precious stones, adorned by the Mahamani-mantapa with gem-set pillars, most gratifying to the sight but indescribable in words, and adjoining on its west the Svami- Pushkarini situated in the sacred forest, to the south of which the lotus-eyed Vishnu, the Supreme God, the holder of the conch, the discus and the club, and the abode of Lakshmi, chose to dwell undereneath a Vimana later on. 

This is the 34th Chapter of “Sri Varaha-Purana" describing the bringing of the Kridachala from Vaikuntha, and forms the 2nd Chapter of “Sri Venkatachala-Mahatmya.” 


### (v) Vishnu appearing in Tiruvengadam. 

On being prayed to by the Devas, Munis, Lokapalas, etc., Vishnu consented to assume the Saumya form since His form as the slayer of Hiranyaksha was terrible, and gave an assurance to them that He liked Venkatadri more than Vaikuntha and promised to rest with Sridevi and Bhudevi on that Hill and grant the prayers to all men. 

On the request of the temple munis, Sveta described the mahatmyam of the Swami pushkarini as follows: 

Being a pleasure-tank of Its water is holy, fragrant, 

It confers religious merit and destroys sins. God in Vaikuntha, it is beloved of Sri and Bhumi. agreeable and auspicious. It is the birth-place of the Ganges and other sacred rivers. It is here set down by Garuda for the sport of Vishnu. Like the Viraja river, it dispels sins, such as those arising from the theft of gold, from the drinking of intoxicating liquors, etc., and grants temporal prosperity to those who only bathe in it every day, and yields desires through mere sight, touch, smell, taste or even thought alone. It is impossible to dilate upon its mahima. Though it may appear to men like an ordinary hill, still their devotion becomes pure on this mountain; and in consonance with the intensity of their bhakti will they realise their objects. 

The bath in the Swami-Pushkarini, the adoration of the feet of a proper teacher and the observance of the Ekadasi-vrata, these three are greatly difficult of attainment. So also being born as man, also living to the full age of man, and the bath in the Swami-Pushkarini are highly impossible of achievement. Consequently the merit attaching to the Swami-Pushkarini is impossible to be fully described. The power inherent in the Swami-Pushkarini, of destroying the mahapataka is amply exemplified in the case of God Subrah- manya who killed Tarakasura. While the merit attaching to the performance of the daily rites and sacrifices will accrue to those who only visit the Venkadri, the performance of the naimittika (occasional sacrifices) here will remove bodily deformity, as is clearly illustrated in the case of Vasava (Indra). In short, for all men who desire the attainment of the four human ends, as Dharmai etc., for women, for sudras, for sinners and in particular for those who lack the sustaining ability to perform the prescribed rites completely, there is doubtless no refuge other than Venkatadri; and this truth is ever fulfilled. 

This is the 35th Chapter of "Sri Varaha-Purana" narrating the prayer of the Devas to Sveta-Varaha, and forms the 3rd Chapter of “ Sri Venkatachala- Mahatmya." 


### (vi) The divine kridas of Sri Varaha. 

At the request of the munis, Suta then described the various kridas of Varaha on the Hill as follows: 

Since the fixing of the Earth by Varaha and the bringing of the Kridadri from Vaikuntha by Garuda, that is to say, from the beginning of the Kalpa, Varaha has been amusing himself with Lakshmi beside river-beds and on torrent ridges and over valleys on this mountain; and even now He abides here, sometimes seen by men and sometimes unseen. Brahma has also affirmed that He will so continue till the end of the Kalpa, now and then presenting Himself before godly men. As in each Kalpa He rescues the Earth as Sveta-Varaha. His age is called the Sveta-Varaha-Kalpa by the Munis. Whenever evil overtakes the pious, dharma deteriorates and adharma prevails and the wicked wax stronger, then He manifests Himself as Naradeva befitting such occasions, eradicates adharma, and firmly establishes sudharma, protects the virtuous and encourages Vedavidya, and from His abiding place reveals Himself to all living beings. He rambles always on the Seshasaila along with Rama (Lakshmi), accompanied by Nityas, Muktas, Devas and Kamarupas; and therein dwells on the Venkatanaga, since He delights in it more than in Svarga, Suryaloka and His own Vaikuntha. 


### (vii) The divine power of Kridadri due to the Lord resting on it. 

In as much as the hill is dear to Bhagavan and is encircled by the sacred crest, here lies the certainty of fructification of human efforts in the different spiritual fields, such as Mantra-siddhi, Tapas-siddhi, Yagna-siddhi, Kamya- siddhi and other siddhis (acquisitions); and no obstacles intervene. Even small deeds on this hill tend to the attainment of the desired objects. All holy tirthas (bathing pools) abound on this hill, A constant worshipper with faith and devotion, who desires knowledge obtains knowledge; who longs for riches acquires much gold; who desires children begets sons; who covets a kingdom secures a state; who wishes for the removal of bodily deformity derives a perfect and lovely physique; and likewise whatever men may desire that they shall obtain. 

Through various causes, the Kridadri has received different names and they are as follows:- 

Chintamani, for the reason of its granting the desired objects. 

Gnanadri, through its power of conferring knowledge. 

Tirthadri, from the situation of all kinds of tirthas on it. 

Pushkaradri, owing to the plentiful growth of the red lotus on it. 

Vrishadri, 'or Dharmadri, from the performance of penance thereon by Dharmadevata for his own prosperity. 

Kanakadri, from the abundance of gold found in it. 

Narayanadri, due to the severe penance of the Brahmana named Narayana for being permitted to impart his own name to the hill. 

Vaikunthadri, for the reason of its having been transplanted from Vaikuntha. 

Simhachala, because of the assumption on this hill of the Nrisimha form by Hari for slaying Hiranyakasipu and protecting Prahlada. Anjanadri, owing to the performance of penance by Anjanadevi on i and her begetting Hanuman, who rendered help to the Devas. 

Varahadri, for its being the Varaha-Kshetra in it. 

Nilagiri, owing to the permanent residence of the Vanara chief Nila on the hill. 

Venkatadri, through the combination of amrita or moksha (bliss), the derivative significance of the root Ve, and aisvarya (prosperity) of the root kata. 

Srinivasa-giri, because of the appearance of God on this hill as Srinivasa (the abode of Lakshmi) to the Devas, who named it Srinivasagiri. Anandadri, named by the dwellers of Vaikunthapura, because of the plenitude of divine sport exhibited on this hill. 

Sri-saila, owing to its power of bestowing prosperity and to the abiding of Lakshmi on it, the roots of the compound word having acquired their significance through the three means of sabda, yoga and rudha. 

And similarly through the change of Kalpas, the hill has gained different names through different causes. It possesses also admirable powers as multitudinous as God's Himself. Its mahima is indescribable even by the four- faced Brahma, the six-faced Subrahmanya, the thousand-eyed Indra or the thousand-hooded Adisesha. 

The Rishis of the Naimisaranya were not fully gratified by this description of Suta, for their curiosity was roused to know more thereof. 

This is the 36th Chapter of “Sri Varaha-Purana” describing the divine grandeur of Sri Varaha who chose His abode on the Kridadri, and forms the 4th Chapter of  "Sri Venkatachala-Mahatmya.” 


### (viii) Lord Venkatesa on the Hill.

The Suta then described the various divine acts of Sri Venkatesa on the Hill. 

Once upon a time He was rambling over the northern region of the hill with Rama (Lakshmi, His divine consort) in the manner of a lover. Certain Munis, who are blessed souls, who know the twenty-four tattvas and hence are capable of appreciating the meritorious deeds and performing them, who have recognised the merit-begetting powers of the hill, and who desired to undertake penance on it and dwell there permanently, determined to make a sacrifice on that hill in contemplation of Vishnu, in as much as the hill confers great punya and contains the different kinds of animals of a tame nature fie for sacrifices, is free from the annoyance of the wicked demons, grows various sorts of fruits and roots, abounds in water-falls, and is surrounded by all sorts of trees fit for sacrificial rites as well as for the resting of the tapasvi (sages) underneath them, with its scenery pleasing to the eye and enticing the mind. And they commenced the yaga in consonance with the injunction of the Sastras. 

At that place arrived mysteriously God Vishnu accompanied by Lakshmi and stood near the pit of the sacrificial fire. He was then clad in a pitambaram (yellow silk) of a lovely hue, with a turban round the head, a sword in His left hand, with a lotus-coloured face brightened by the chewing of the betel- nuts, with odours pervading all directions from the musk smeared over His body, with broad eyes resembling the lotus, with a conch-shaped neck, with long arms, with a beauty enticing the world equal to the bewitching beauty of Kandarpa (Cupid), with a golden Yagnopavita, and with a soft, smooth and lovely body; in this manner did he enter into the midst of the Yagna-sabha composed of the Mahatmas. All the Munis saw Him with eyes resembling the white lotus, in company with the female consort who was habited in the fashion of a damsel holding a lotus in Her hand for frolic; whose body put on the colour of melted gold (i.e., yellow), of the pistil of the lotus and of the turmeric; who coqueted often; who had curly forehead hair; whose face, resembling the white moon of the autumn, was graced by the chewing of the tambula (betel-nuts); whose two eyes were long reaching to the ears; who was as glaringly bright as the sunlight; who possessed a well proportioned physical frame never before had by any; and who looked like Lakshmi. Having beheld the couple, the Munis were struck with wonder, and they accosted Him thus: "O King! Who are you that looks like a royal prince, that seems fit to rule the earth, that possesses the thirty-two marks of royalty, and resembles Rama, the son of Dasaratha? What has brought you hither? Which place is your habitation? Who are your mother and father? And what is your name? 

To these queries Bhagavan replied as follows:-"I am neither a king nor a Brahman; I am devoid of Jati or caste; I own no mother or father; I have no fixed abode, and I am present everywhere and eat everything; I move through all space and assume all forms; I am nameless and possess no marked qualities; and I have come to see you. O sages, who are tapas- sreshthas, versed in Veda and Vedanta, tell me how the bark of the fig-tree tied with the tiger's skin while the udgata psalm is recited can become sacred. So he questioned the Munis with regard to the defects of the ritual of the yaga. On this the Munis consulted together and, fearing that the proper moment for offering the sacrifice might pass off, they forthwith made the offering of the vapa-homa of good odour into the flaming fire, agreeable to the precepts of the Sastras. Instantly He approached the place of the offering and received the vapa with both His hands, at the same time appearing bedecked with Sankha (conch), Chakra (discus), and Gada (club); with the Srivatsa mark on His chest; with Sri (Lakshmi) ever dwelling on His bosom; and adorned with all ornaments. Dazzled with His brightness, the Munis were struck with stupor, and for a moment stood motionless like pictures. And God, after expressing to them His satisfaction as to their yaga, suddenly vanished from their view. 

The Munis were thereon joyed to find that Vishnu Himself came in person to accept their vapa offering and hence felt that their good fortune was unequalled;and they also felt that their lives became blest; and with these happy thoughts they completed the remaining rites of the yagna. 


### (ix) The legend of the youth. 

On a certain occasion Venkatadhisa (Venkatesa), while recreating Himself on a peak of the mountain in the form of a lovely youth, observed an old Brahmana whose limbs had lost their grit and tightness, whose eyes were sunken and were bereft of sight, whose knees were rickety, and whose body was tormented by hunger and thirst. Having lost his way on the mountain, he rested at a place from where he called aloud for his young son, wonde- ring at the same time if his son had wandered away, leaving him an old man of a hundred years, alone. By his frequent crying, his throat was choked and his palate and tongue became dry and stiff. The youthful Venkatesa asked the old Brahmana as to whom he was calling and told him that no young man of the name of “ Kaundinya " was at hand. The old man besought Him for the means of reaching his distant asrama in his then state of approaching death, and uttered in disgust why he should, being too advanced in age and debiliated in body with which he could not carry on his daily rites, and devoid of riches and bereft of his relations, still be suffered by God to live on. The merciful God thereupon questioned him, as if in jest, whether the old man desired to live longer, notwithstanding his frail body, wrinkled eye-brows, and sightless eyes; to which he replied that no such desire to prolong his existence haunted him, except for the fulfilment of his obligation to the Devas for the day through the completion of the nityakarma and jyotishihoma on that particular day. On this reply God offered His hand to the old Brahmana and led him a short distance, pointed out to him a pool of water, and, asking him to bathe in it, told him that after his bath they might proceed to his asrama. Accordingly the old man bathed in it and forthwith became transformed into a youth of sixteen years. And instantly God appeared to him with a thousand mouths, a thousand faces, a thousand heads and a thousand arms. Then repaired to that place the Devas and stood high up in the sky in great astonishment. Showers of flowers rained and the Deva- dundubhi was sounded; and all the Devas praised Him heartily. He directed the old Brahmana to continue to perform his daily rites for which purpose, He said that He will also endow him with riches. And immediately he vanished. Then the Gods declared that, in as much as that sacred flowing water transformed, the old man into a youth, that stream shall be denominated the Kumaradharanadi and shall be known by that name in the world. He who bathes in its waters at the three intervals of the day continuously for three months shall acquire control over his human passions; shall be cleansed of all his sins, and shall attain the holy feet of Vishnu. Thus announcing, the Tridasas returned to their place, filled with astonishment. 

(x) King Sankhana's recovery of lost kingdom. 

In the city of Sankasya there reigned a king of the Soma-vamsa (lunar-race) of great prowess, by name Sankhana. He ruled over a wealthy and extensive state which comprised many kingdoms and which he inherited from his fore fathers. At one time, owing to the decline of his punya (merit of good deeds) he was dispossessed of his kingdom by his Samantarajas. He was therefore obliged to flee his country in great sorrow with his queen and ministers; and, proceeding southwards in the direction of Ramasetu, he caught sight of it and bathed in the sacred sea-water near it. Thence he turned back and gradually reached the Suvarnamukhari river and bathed in it as also in the padmasaras situated on its northern bank. He sojourned there for a time and performed his daily religious rites. He felt very sad and thought to himself, "I lost my throne and I am constrained to live in the forest. My power and authority are usurped and exercised by my enemies, and my paratantram, i.e., condition of subjection to others, which causes much grief, is more painful to bear than the pangs of death. How shall I make a living and under whose protection? Where shall I wander and what is my refuge?" With these tormenting thoughts he fell asleep. 

To his hearing, an asariravak (a voice from the blue) thus uttered: “You, long-armed king, do not grieve but assume fortitude. To the north from here at a distance of a kros (two miles and a half) runs a hill, famous on earth as Venkatachala. Kamapati who is a Kamadhenu (wish-giving celestial cow) to the suppliants, a Suradruma (boon-granting heavenly tree) to the afflicted, and a Chintamani (the celestial stone which has the power of granting prayers) to the sorrowful; who is merciful without cause and who yields the wishes of the devotees, abides on that hill. On it is situated a tank which is resplendent with the red lotus growing in it and is named as the "Swami-pushkarini.” Adjoining it on its west bank rises an ant-hill; proceed thither, erect a hut for yourself, and, resting there, take a bath in the tank at the three hours of the morning, mid-day and evening. In that ant-hill dwells the four-armed Venkatesa bedecked with the Sankha (conch) and the Chakra (discus), the grantor of boons and a manifestation of Hari (Vishnu). With all your mind meditate on Him and worship Him for six months, and your royalty (svamitvam) will return to you." 

184 

On hearing the voice of the incorporeal being, his sorrow abated and he ascended the hill to its summit which is holy and on which grow different kinds of trees, live numerous yaks and musk-deer, as well as many sweet- voiced birds; and, searching for the Swami-Pushkarini-tirtha, he found it and was overjoyed. The tank contained pure water, abounding in water- lilies of a red hue and fishes and tortoises, and its banks were shaded by various sorts of flowering and fruit-bearing trees. There he put up a hut and lived in it, had the three ablutions daily at morning, noon and night and worshipped Venkatesa, observing a regulation of food at the same time as a vrata (observance) and thiswise resided there for six months. 

Then from the midst of the Swami-Pushkarini rose up to the sky a divya+ vimana (divine chariot), shining as brightly as many suns together and illuminating the ten directions. Within it was standing in all grandeur God, the Lord of Sri or Lakshmi, holding the Sankha, Chakra and Gada (club) in His hands and accompanied by Sri and Bhumi (Goddess of Earth). And there came the Devas headed by Brahma, Munis, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Kinnaras, Dikpalas, Vasus, Sapta-Rishis, Sadhyas and Rudras, and high up in the sky were heard the sounds of the bheri (kettle drum) and muraja (small drum), and all Devas sang and danced, and played their musical instruments; and extolled God with the Veda-mantras. Immediately Sankhana stood up in astonishment and prostrated himself before the Lord, and, praising Him, prayed to Him thus:~" O Devadeva (Lord of the Gods)! Jagannatha (Lord of the world)! who is ever intent upon protecting the world, I have obtained your darsana (vision of your manifestation). My kingship was usurped by my enemies and I am deprived of my kingdom. O Ocean of mercy, the liberal grantor of boons, and the ruler of the world! Pray, protect me. I am not conversant with the process and observance of rites and vows, rectitude, prayer and meditation. But, however, I have feasted myself with your excellent manifestation." To this the dark-necked Sriyahpati replied:-"Do not sorrow; I have bestowed on you kingship which you previously enjoyed, inasmuch as you have exhibited great devotion. Whoever bathes in the Swami pushkarini obtains swamitvam (sovereignty). In proportion to the integrity and devotion they bring to bear on their performance of ablutions, shall they surely attain swamitvam of the corresponding degree and magnitude, and shall never be under subjection to others. You, ruler of the earth! Go quick and rule your kingdom undisturbed." Having thus addressed him in the presence of the Devas, God disappeared from their view. 

The Tridasas (Devas) then exclaimed, "The designation of “Swami- pushkarini" which the ancients applied to this tank through the process of rudha was well merited on account of its being the queen of tanks; and now God himself has significantly derived the term from its inherent power of granting swamitvam." This tirtha possesses superb virtues and destroys sins even by the mere sight of it. And the dwellers of this region are holy and blessed." So saying, they retired to their abode with a joyful heart. 

And in a joyous mood Sankhana Maharaja, accompanied by his wife, got down the hill and wended his way towards his own country. Meanwhile the enemy kings who had wrested the kingdom from him grew jealous of one another, fought among themselves for sole mastery and thereby exhausted themselves. Realising their weakness and unfitness to rule, they urged the people to trace their king Sankhana and beseech him to return and rule the state. The messengers found him out on the banks of the Godavari river and intimated to him that his enemies had bestowed the kingdom back on him and requested him to go and rule over his subjects. On their importunities Sankhana returned to his country called Kambhoja, when all the princes and chiefs unanimously crowned him king. Having thus secured his throne, Sankhana, through the grace of Venkatesa, ruled the kingdom in peace. 


### (xi) The legend of Atmarama. 

In the Madhya-desa (Central India) lived a famous Brahmana named Atmarama, born in a noble family and engaged in the adoration of Gods and Brahmanas. His father too was a renowned Brahmana, learned in the Vedas and Vedangas and intensely devoted to the worship of Vishnu. Like the father, the son also was modest and was beloved of all learned men. After the demise of his father, he lost the ancestral wealth which he came by, became devoid of the means of livelihood and ceased to be respected anywhere. He thought within himself, “How does it happen that I, being born in a high family, should suffer this destitution and degradation? Ill-fame has attached itself to me and to my great ancestors. Whither shall I wander to seek relief?" In this sorrowful mood he journeyed on and reached the Venkatadri (hill), came to the Kapila-tirtha adjoining the shrine of Kapilesvara, bathed in its water and, ascending the hill, took a bath also in the seventeen tirthas com- mencing from the Kapila-tirtha. With this bath his sins were washed off and his mind became calm and clear; and, seating himself in a secluded spot, he began to ruminate over his poor condition and the way out of it. 

At that time he observed nearby, in the midst of a cave, Sanatkumara- yogindra deeply absorbed in dhyana and yoga and resplendent as the sun. Believing that this yogindra was not ordinarily accessible to men and that he might intuitively know the life-story of the entire humanity, and desiring to learn something of himself, he prostrated himself before the sage and said, “Owing to my evil deeds I suffer greater torment than is to be endured in hell. I seek your protection and conjure you to suggest means of escape from my distress." The sage concentrated his mind for a time on the Brahmanas' condition and then briefly told him, “Wake up, son. Having wrought sinful deeds in your past life, what can avail your sorrowing in the present life, when the fruit of those sins is ripe for effect. In your previous life you caused grave impediments to charitable gifts through discouraging both the giver and the receiver; you gave trouble to the happy souls in various ways; you did not, even in the least, deign to make gifts of money, house, land, cows, grain, clothing, ornaments, etc.; you only committed impious acts and never did a good deed; and you failed to place faith in and adore Vishnu who is the dispeller of the sorrows of the devotees and the grantor of their wishes. As such, how do you expect to be happy in this life? However there is a way out; hear me and I shall intimate  you.” 

On hearing these words, the Brahmana, with palms joined in deep reverence, addressed him thus, "O sage, you are like an ark to me who am immersed in the ocean of sorrow, like the shower of rain to the sun-scorched vegetation, like a treasure to the poor, and like a physician to the sick. Through the grain-worth of my good fortune I have found you here. Pray protect me, the worst sinner, and extend your kind looks to me." Being thus extolled, Sanatkumarayogindra replied, “Son, I shall explain to you the tattvartham which is a great secret.” 

On being thus initiated by Sanatkumara, the Brahmana Atmarama was flushed with joy mingled with astonishment and awe. Repeating this mantram, he climbed the hill and, feeling that his life thenceforth became blest and witnessing the running waters here and there on the way, reached the Swami- pushkarini, which equals the heavenly Ganges and the Viraja rivers, which confers punya (merit) on persons bathing in it and in which holy sages perform their ablutions. In this Swami-pushkarini Atmarama took his bath in the manner prescribed by the sastras and his body soon became lightened of a heavy burden. He then saw a fine forest close by as well as a lofty vimana (dome) protected by the Siddhas, adorned with many gopuras and mantapas, set with gems and built of gold, vying with Gandharva-nagara (Alaka), enticing both the eye and the mind, shining (causing pleasure) through dance and instrumental music, and worshipped by the assemblage of Gods. 

The Brahmana was taken by surprise at the sight of this wondrous vimana, and with the increase of his merit he proceeded towards it and within it saw Venkatesvara, the Lord of Sri (Lakshmi), with eyes resembling an open lotus, adorned with the Sankha and Chakra, with the varahasta (hand held to point down so as to indicate the grant of boons), graced with a kirita-makuta (crown), shining with the kundalas (ear-rings), embellished with all ornaments, wearing the yellow silk robe and looking as beautiful as countless Kandarpas (Cupids), and accompanied by Sri (Lakshmi) and Bhumi (Earth); and praised by Brahma and Siva as the sole repose of the world and as the absolute refuge, manifesting Himself as Brahma the creator and Mahesvara the destroyer of the world. 

To this omnipotent Venkatesa the Brahmana Atmarama made a humble obeisance and, rising up, exclaimed, “Lord! You are omniscient, since you dwell in all souls, and I bow to you," and stood still, overcome with awe. God Srinivasa, who is all-knowing, all-merciful and supreme, divining his object, addressed him thus:-"Fear not; grieve not; in consideration of Vyuha-Lakshmi, whom you have invoked, all your evil acts are condoned; prosperity is bestowed on you so as to last long; and long life, health and wisdom are also granted to you. O excellent Brahmana, enjoy long, the wealth conferred on you." While hearing this divine utterance, Atmarama prostrated himself before God, and, on rising up, found that both God and the forest had disappeared. So he retraced his steps to the Swami-pushkarini in great fright and cogitated within himself whether all that had happened till then was merely a dream, or a freak of the mind, or a mystery of God, or an actuality, and exclaimed, “O Lord! I am unable to know the truth of this vision and I trust that it comes true." Then he descended the hill and, taking up his abode near the Venkatadri and obtaining peace of mind and wisdom, happily lived long. 


### (xii) The mahatmya of the Seventeen tirthas. 

The Suta then addressed the sages about the mahatmya of the seventeen tirthas beginning with the Kapila tirtha as follows:- 

1. Kapila-tirtha:-At the foot of the hill is enshrined Kapila Lingam which was formerly worshipped by the sage Kapila in the Patala-loka. For some cause it split the earth and rose to its surface and all the Devas prayed that it might rest there alone. Making an opening in the earth in front of it, appeared a kapila-pasu (tawny cow) later on and this hole is the Kapila-tirtha which possesses powers of destroying all sins. 

2. Sakra-tirtha:--Above the Kapila-tirtha lies the very holy Sakra- tirtha, by a bath in which Indra became released of the curse of Gautama for his illicit connection with Ahalya. 

3. Vishvaksena-saras:-Above this second one is the sacred Vishvaksena- saras where Vishvaksena, the son of Varuna, rendered penance and obtained an identical form with that of Vishnu together with the commandership of Vishnu's forces. 

4-8. Panchayudha-tirthas:-The Five tirthas named after the five weapons of Vishnu, viz., Sankha, (conch), Chakra (disc), Gada (club), Sarnga (bow) and Nandaka (sword), which are all very holy pools, are situated above the Vishvaksena saras. 

9. Agnikunda-tirtha:-This lies above the Panchayudha-tirthas and is inaccessible. 

10. Brahma-tirtha:-Above the last one is situated the Brahma-tirtha which confers great merit. 

11-17. Saptarshi-tirthas-Near the Brahma-tirtha are the Saptarshi- tirthas which contain holy waters. Of these seven tirthas the first one possesses ten times as great merit as that of all the previously mentioned tirthas taken together, and each successive one among the seven similar possesses merit ten times greater than that of each prior one. 

(xiii) Legends of the tirthas. 

The Suta then continued as follows. “Once upon a time a certain Brahmana was preparing to start on a pilgrimage to the holy waters and Kamaladhisa (Vishnu), appearing to him in a dream, asked him why he intended to go on that religious tour and intimated to him, “On this Pushkara-saila are situated seven- teen excellent tirthas and among them the Kapila-saras is the most holy. By bathing in these seventeen tirthas as enjoined in the sastras will doubtless accrue to you the merit resulting from the bath in all the tirthas on earth.” Accordingly the Brahmana gave up his programme of his intended tirthayatra, proceeded to the Venkatachala, bathed, in order, in the seventeen tirthas and obtained merit, 1 was informed, just as it was declared by God. The inherent powers of the three crores and a half of the tirthaş situated in the three worlds are existent in this Harigiri. O Munis, all men desiring to encircle the earth will derive the concomitant merit by the circumambulation only of this auspicious Venkatagiri which abounds in holy waters and sacred spots. I also learn that, by the mere sight of the top of the peaks of the Venkatachala, Balarama obtained, in full measure, the merit attaching to a tirtha-yatra, 

(1) The mahatmya of the Pandava-tirtha:-On the advice of Sri Krishna the five Pandava brothers came to the Venkatachala and lived for a year at a certain tirtha on it protected by the Kshetrapalas, making use of its water for bathing, drinking and other purposes. At the end of the period Dharma- raja dreamt one day that, inasmuch as they had lived for a year at that maha- tirtha, their sins had vanished, giving place to goodness, by the accession of which they would secure victory in war and regain their kingdom. Since the time of their habitation the tirtha has come to be known as the Pandava- tirtha. 

The mahatmya of the Jarahara and other tirthas:-The three tirthas, Jarahara-tirtha, Valighna-tirtha and Rasayana-tirtha, lie on the Chintamanigiri in the caves of the hill on the eastern side of the Swami-Pushkarini, within a distance of twenty-two arrow-shots; but they have become evanescent through the maya (illusion) of God; and even the Devas have not seen these wonderful tirthas. 

In the Kanakachala exist mines of the eight kinds of metals and, consistent with the fruit of their meritorious deeds in the different yugas, do men know them. The ascent of the hill in deep devotion will yield strength of legs and rapidity of motion to the lame; give clear and beautiful eyes and vision to the blind; bestow learning and wisdom upon the dumb; endow the deaf with sound hearing, and grant many children to the sterile woman, and wealth to the poor. All these results are attained only through bhakti (faith) centred in the hill as to its powers of atonement. What person knows fully and accurately the true nature and form of the Venkatadri? It is sometimes called Srinivasagiri and sometimes Kanakachala; sometimes it appears as an embodiment of knowledge and wisdom and sometimes in the form of gems; and sometimes again shines as Lord Srinivasa decorated with ornaments; and owing to the change of times it presents itself to some as a common natural hill. As such, which person can perceive the greatness and sanctity of this hill? 

A little of what I heard and saw I have rehearsed to you, as it is not possible to narrate everything that I had heard." 


### (xiv) The advent of Srirama to Venkatadri. 

The Suta then described the visit of Srirama to Venkatadri as follows: “Rama, who had eyes resembling the lotus, who possessed all good qualities and who was learned in all sastras, was the son of Dasaratha. During the progress of his expedition to kill Ravana, he camped with his army on the auspicious Venkatachala in company with Saumitri (Lakshmana), the swift Hanuman and the high-souled Sugriva. After leaving the woody banks of the Pampa-saras, and after having performed his ablutions in the Swami-Pushkarini he destroyed his enemy Ravana together with all his followers he gained victory in battle. So have I heard of this legend which I will now relate to you. Follow me closely. 

As soon as Rama the archer reached the Seshachala with all the numerous Vanaras (monkeys) from the Rishyamukachala with the avowed object of annihilating Ravana, the blessed Anjanadevi, the mother of Hanuman, greeted him and prayed to him, “O long-armed Rama! I am here eagerly expecting your august presence, and like-wise are several Munis residing in this same forest engaged in long and constant self-mortification, awaiting your visit to this place; please therefore favour us all and bless us, and then resume your march." Rama replied, My time is so fleeting as not to allow me to proceed to that place of penance of the Munis. My business on hand is heavy and urgent, and your request will be complied with on my return journey." On this reply of Rama, Hanuman humbly suggested, "Since the huge Vanara army is very much tired with the rapid march, it is desirable to make a halt somewhere nearby; and this hill too is on the way. It is called Anjanagiri and it abounds in trees bearing flowers and fruits at all times, in numerous waterfalls and torrents, caves, peaks and plateaus and in edible roots and bulbs. Here honey is available in plenty in the hives on the trees growing at the caves in the hill. You are yourself aware of these facts and you may act by your inclination." At this suggestion of Hanuman, Rama said, “O son of Anjana-devi, I am, no doubt, acquainted with these things and I also heed your words. But you must proceed in advance on our present business." So directing the chief of the monkeys, Rama advanced with his Vanara army to the excellent Venkatadri containing great varieties of trees, flowers and fruits, and singing and chirping birds. 

In the northern region of the hill a certain learned Brahmana, named Nirloma, was doing penance in contemplation of Svayambhu (Brahma) with the desire of attaining the Brahmaloka. At one time Brahma appeared to him and intimated to him that he might enter the Brahmaloka soon after paying his obeisance to Rama in the company of Saumitri (Lakshmana). Accordingly this Nirloma met Rama, presented him with offerings of fruits, bulbs and other edible roots and addressed him thus, " By the sight of your lotus-like face my life has become blest and the long penance I have been practising has now borne fruit. O Lord Rama, permit me therefore to pass to the Brahmaloka." Rama granted the prayer of the Brahmana and then got up the hill. There he unburdened certain Yakshas of their curse and reached the asrama of Anjanadevi situated near the Akasaganga.

 After receiving adoration from her at her hermitage, he moved on to the Swami- pushkarini, in which tirtha, which grants universal victory, bathed Rama, Lakshmana, Hanuman, Sugriva, Angada, Jambavan, and Nila; and Rama, having procured a collection of fruits and roots, made a gift of them to the Munis, agreeably to the precepts of the sastras. Here on the south-west of the Swami-pushkarini Hanuman put up separate cottages for the different Vanara leaders, secured sweet fruits, roots and honey in large quantities and worshipped Rama with them. Rama was exceedingly pleased with it and he rested there quite happily, as if in his own palace, in the midst of Sugriva and other chiefs. And the various kinds of monkeys, big and small, feasted themselves with flowers, fruits, roots, bulbs, honey and sweet water and other food substances, and, becoming fattened and inspired with these fills of food, they roamed about the hill and amused themselves in large groups. Some of them Jived deep into the water and some just below the surface: some roared and some jumped; some leaped from peak to peak and some from tree to tree and thus onwards from forest to forest; and so the monkeys roved and exerted themselves from feelings of joy and pride of strength. Some mounted on others and some took hold of the tails of their playmates and jumped on towards others, while some, catching their fellows, kissed their ears. These monkeys in groups exclaimed, We will burn Ravana with our sight alone in the battle; or we will pull out Lanka with its foundation or drag up the Trikuta mount on which Lanka stands; we will cross the ocean infested with crocodiles, bring down the moon and the sun by the force of our arms and for the sake of Rama we will break all mountains and cut all trees and enter the Patala, the Maharloka or the Rasatala in whichever of them the wicked Ravana may seek shelter; and we will ourselves destroy this warrior who is the scourge of the world. Why does the all-merciful Rama delay to decapitate Ravana?" And these valiant and huge-bodied Vanaras rambled over the meritorious Venkatadri in countless numbers making up an arbuda (one hundred crores) which exceeds many crores, and sojourned on it in amity among themselves. 


### (xv) Legend regarding the presence of Lord Srinivasa on the Hill. 

The Brahma purana has the following legend about the reason for Lord Srinivasa being present on the Hill. 

Once, Vishnu wanted to have a change from his usual abode in Vaikuntha. He asked Narada to suggest a place on this earth which would be suitable for diversion and sport. Narada suggested the neighbourhood of the place where Seshachala came to be located, later on. Subsequently, Vayu and Sesha disputed their relative strength and entered into a serious dispute. Sesha wound his long body around a part of Meru and challenged Vayu to move it. Vayu did his best to shake the hillock but could not. Ultimately, Sesha opened his mouth to breathe and taking advantage of it, Vayu entered his body and blew off part of the hill. After the hill had travelled a long distance, Meru interfered and requested Vayu to leave it there and the latter did so. Ashamed of his defeat, Sesha did penance thinking of Vishnu. Vishnu appeared before him and offered a boon. Sesha, assuming the shape of a hill, requested the Lord to stay on his head, and wanted the hill to be known as Seshachala. Vishnu thought of Narada's suggestion, made previously, and agreed to live on Seshachala. 

The Bhavishyottara Purana narrates another story which is as follows:- Once a number of Rishis assembled on the bank of the Ganga and got things ready for the performance of a Yajna. Narada came to them and asked them which god they intended to please by performing the sacrifice. The Rishis were nonplussed and requested the sage, Bhrigu, to solve the problem. That sage undertook to solve the problem by examining the three chief divinities. He first went to the abode of Brahma and found him busy chanting the Vedas with one mouth, uttering the name of Narayana with another and looking at Vani with the third face. He took no notice of Bhrigu. Then the sage went to the abode of Siva. There again he found Siva fully absorbed in sporting with his consort and not taking notice of Bhrigu's arrival and presence. From here Brigu went to Vaikuntha and found Vishnu similarly engaged in amours with Lakshmi. Disgusted with this, Bhrigu kicked Vishnu on his chest. Vishnu immediately got up, massaged the Rishi's foot and enquired if it had been injured. Pleased with this kind attention paid by Vishnu, Bhrigu returned to the Rishis and advised them to dedicate the Yajna to Vishnu. Lakshmi was angered because Bhrigu kicked the spot which was her favourite resort on the bosom of the Lord and went away to Karavirapura or Kolhapur to stay there, leaving Vishnu. Unable to bear the solitude, Vishnu left Vaikuntha and wandered about. In course of time he came to Seshachala, found it sufficiently interesting and settled down on the mountain in an ant-hill, on the bank of the Swamipushkarini. 


### (xvi) Legend of how temples were built for the Lord. 

Several puranas associated with the names of the several kings contain legends about the worship of the Lord on Venkatadri. Of these the following are a few:-

(a) Story of Sankha: 

Once, in the Krita-yuga, there was a king named Sankha in the solar race. He desired to do something which would last eternally and consulted his guru, Vasishta. Vasishta advised him to go to Venkatadri and pray to the Lord. The king came to the hill and did penance. The Lord appeared before him in a vimana and asked the king to build a vimana like the one in which he came and install in it an image which would resemble him. Sankha carried out the command and built a vimana and installed in it an image of the Lord. This temple was destroyed at the end of the Kalpa and the image got buried in the ground up to the knees; an anthill surrounded it and a tamarind tree grew up offering it good shade. 

(b) Story of Chola king. 

In the Kali age there was a Chola king. One day, he went out to hunt and wandered about killing many animals near the Seshachala. Halting at a place for a little rest, he found a handsome young woman plucking flowers. Struck by her beauty, he approached her and asked her for her antecedents. He was told that she was the daughter of a Naga, named Dhanamjaya, who lived in Patala. The king then conveyed to her his sincere love and asked for her hand. The Naga maid asked the king to obtain her father's permission but the king did not have the patience to go through the formal process. Ultimately, they married in the Gandharva way and spent the night together happily. Next morning the Naga girl went back to her place. On hearing of her matrimony, her father was pleased. Very soon, she conceived and delivered a beautiful boy. This child grew up into a fine young man. Once the boy asked the mother to show him his father. The mother told him who his father was and showed him the way to the earth. The boy followed his mother's instructions and went to the Chola King. The king forgot his relationship with the Naga woman and was doubting the veracity of the boy's story. Then a divine voice assured the king that the boy was his own son and advised him to crown the son. Pleased with this assurance, the king built a city on the spot where he met the Naga maid and installed the boy as its king. This ruler came to be known as the Chola-chakravarti. 

One day, the keepers of his cows came and told this king that every day, as they passed by an anthill, one of the pots was being broken and its milk spilt over the anthill. That night, the king had a dream. A very handsome person black in colour appeared before him and told him “Oh king, I come from Srinivasa and live with him on Seshadri. He lives on the hill with Sri and Bhu. You come and see him." The king followed him in the dream to Seskindri and there saw a brilliant vimana. Next day, a Sabara came to the king and told him a strange story thus-“ Sire, I live on Seshadri cultivating priyangu roots. I offer some of them to the god and eat the rest. Once, I saw Svetavaraha spoiling the crop. I kept my boy to watch the field and myself went in search of honey. On returning, I found that the boy had eaten without the offering being made to god. I got angry and attempted to kill the boy but a divine voice told me that the god had partaken of the food before the boy and asked me to fetch you to Seshadri...." Chakravarti asked his ministers to send behind him the milk of one thousand cows and himself followed the Sabara. When they reached the top of the hill, the Sabara showed an anthill to the king and suggested that it might be dug out. The king was afraid of doing so. He caused the milk sent by his ministers to be poured on the ant-hill. The ant-hill melted and out of it emerged the glorious figure of the Lord, bearing Samkha and Chakra in the upper hands, keeping the lower right in varada and the lower left in Katyavalambita. The king praised the Lord in many ways and requested him to stay where he was and as he was. The Lord agreed and asked the king to worship him daily. During the course of the worship he was talking to the king, as if to a friend. 

Once a brahman, named Krishnasarma, came to the king accompanied by his wife and a baby, told him that he was on a pilgrimage to Banaras and requested the king to kindly grant an asylum to his wife and child till the time of his return. The King agreed. A separate house was assigned to the lady and provisions for six months given to her. She was asked not to stir out of the house. Subsequently, the king forgot about this brahman lady and her child. In course of time Krishnasarma returned from the pilgrimage and asked for his wife and child. The king sent a servant to fetch them but the servant came back and told the king in secrecy that only the rotten skeletons of the lady and her child were to be found in the house. The king was shocked at this and repented for his foolishness in not taking proper care of them. He told the brahman, however, that the lady has been to Seshachala to see the Lord and that he can meet her the next day. Having thus satisfied the Brahman, he ran to the hill and sought the protection of the Lord. The god commanded his general, Vishvaksena, to fetch some water from the Asthikuta tank and sprinkle it over the two skeletons. When this was done, the lady and her child assumed their former shape and form and got up as if from sleep. The king restored them to Krishnasarma. 

Some time later, a demon, named Simhada, settled down on the hill. He did penance and obtained a boon to the effect that no celestial,semi-celestial or human should be able to kill him. He started harassing the Devas thereafter. The Devas sought the protection of the Lord. He asked them to go to his devotee, the Chakravarti, seek his help and enter his body with their amsas and they did so. On hearing of their request, the king came to Seshadri and sought the Lord's guidance. The Lord gave him his own weapons, the Samkha and the Chakra and asked him to go and fight the demon. The king and his men went to the Papanasana-tirtha, where the demon lived, and challenged him to battle. During the bitter fight that ensued, the king used the Lord's chakra which served the head of the demon. The king came back to the Lord and offered his sincere thanks. He then returned the weapons but the Lord told the weapons-"Go and live in tirthas named after you. I want to live for some time without you. In the Kali age, for some reason, a man will invest me with artificial Samkha and Chakra. I will hold them thus, to please the world.” 


### (xvii) Legend of Rangadasa. 

There is a legend about a devotee called Rangadasa which is found in the Brahmanda purana as follows:---- 

Once there was a Vaikhanasa brahman, named Gopinatha, in the Chola country. He was a great devotee of Krishna. He requested the Lord to grant him salvation. Krishna asked him to go to Seshadri and worship Srinivasa there and assured him that a sudra, named Rangadasa, would meet him on the way and be of use to him. The brahman came to the foot of the hill and there met Rangadasa. The two went up the hill and dug the image of the Lord from out of the ant-hill. They installed it in a mantapa with a thatched roof and built a stone wall around it. Rangadasa used to fetch flowers and make garlands out of them and Gopinatha was worshipping the Lord. One day, as Rangadasa was preparing the garlands, he saw a Gandharva couple sporting. Unable to control his mind he had an ejection. Repenting for this, he threw away the garlands and flowers, already prepared, had a purificatory bath, gathered fresh flowers, made new garlands and went into the shrine. Gopinatha chided him for being late but Rangadasa did not explain the reason for the delay because of shame. A divine voice told Rangadasa "Your mind is upset. You cannot do any good deed in this condition. Be born again and this time as a king. Enjoy all worldly pleasures. Then build a good abode for me. Once, some enemies will cause you trouble. I shall give you my samkha and chakra with which you will be able to overcome them." 

196 

Rangadasa died and was born as a king. He came to be called Chakravarti and the people of the Dravida country called him Tondaman. He lived at Narayanavanam and used to go every day to Seshachala and worship the Lord. In course of time he built for the god two prakaras with two gopuras, the Garbhagriha, kitchen, Yagasala, granary and Gosala. He presented many jewels to the god and instituted many festivals. Once a number of enemies invaded his territory and harassed him. The king went to the Lord and sought his help. The god lent him his own Samkha and Chakra. The king defeated and drove away the enemies and came back to the Lord. He then requested the Lord to stay as he was without the samkha and chakra and that his archa-image should be without them. The Lord agreed. 


### (xviii) The legend of how the Lord received a blow. 

The following legend is found in the Bhavishyottara purana. 

Once Lakshmi converted Brahma into a cow and Siva into a calf and sold them to the Chola king. The cow which used to wander over Seshachala, discovered the anthill in which the Lord lay, taking rest. Thereafter she used to shed her milk on the anthill and did not yield a drop to the milkman of the king. The queen took the milkman to task and blamed him for stealing the cow's milk. Next day, the milkman followed the cow and saw her pour the milk over the anthill. Incensed at this, he took an axe and wanted to kill the cow. The Lord came out of the anthill and took the blow upon himself. Blood gushed out of the wound made in his head. The milkman saw this and died of shock, on the spot. The cow went down the hill, reached the king and showed intense grief. The Chola king followed the cow, came up the hill and saw the pitiable sight. The Lord cursed him to become a pisacha and said In future time an Akasaraja will give his daughter, Padmavathi, in marriage to me. He will then present me a kirita which I will wear on Fridays. As long as I wear it, I will not feel the pain of the wound on my head and from that time you will also be normal.” 


### (xix) Lord Srinivasa's marriage. 

The Bhavishyottara purana has the following legend of the marriage of Lord Srinivasa. 

Once Srinivasa put on a fine dress and started for a hunt. He chased an elephant and wandered a long distance and ultimately entered a garden. A beautiful young maiden and her companions, who were plucking flowers, ran away on seeing the elephant and took shelter behind a tree. This maiden was the foster daughter of king Akasaraja and was named Padmavati. This Akasaraja and his younger brother, Tondaman, were the sons of Suvira, a king of the lunar race. Akasaraja found Padmavati concealed in a lotus while he was getting a piece of land ploughed in order to construct a Yagasala. Being childless, he took this child home, named her Padmavati and brought her up. Subsequently, he had a son, named Vasudeva. Srinivasa approached Padmavati and described himself as Krishna, son of Devaki and Vasudeva, and brother of Rama and Subhadra. He asked for her hand. The attendant maidens of the princess got wild and pelted stones at the lord. His horse was hit by them and fell down dead. Srinivasa departed from there taking a northern direction. 

The lord returned to his abode in the ant-hill and lay down in great grief. Vakula, who attended upon him, appeased him by many courtesies and found out that he had fallen in love with Padmavati. The Lord asked her to go to Akasaraja and negotiate his marriage with Padmavati. Even before Vakula could reach the king's abode, he himself went there in the disguise of a gipsy woman and persuaded Akasaraja's queen, Dharani, to give her daughter, Padmavati, in marriage to Srinivasa. Padmavathi was also struck by love and was pining for the young man she had met in the flower garden. When Vakula reached the king's palace the ground was already prepared and the marriage was settled. Srinivasa set out with all the gods and goddesses as his relations and married Padmavati. 

Tondaman built a temple: Very soon after the marriage, Akasaraja died and his brother, Tondaman, and son Vasudana, fought for the throne. Srinivasa interfered at the instance of Padmavati and divided the kingdom between the two disputants. Tondaman got the Tondamandalam part and Vasudana obtained the Narayanavanam part of the kingdom. 

This Tondaman was Rangadasa in the previous birth. So, the Lord commanded him to build a fine abode for His residence, Tondaman constructed a temple. The Lord lived in it with great satisfaction. The king had many vehicles made and performed a number of utsavas for the Lord. 


### (xx) The other legends. 

There are many other puranas which contain other legends. 

The Padma Purana narrates the legend connected with the destruction of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha. These demons were extremely powerful and could not be overpowered by the celestials including Vishnu.. The Lord therefore cleverly obtained a boon from them that they would both die at his hands. The demons then prayed to him that He should kill them on a spot where there was no water. Lord Vishnu then enlarged his thighs, seated the demons on his thigh and destroyed them, with his chakra. To this day, the Lord of Tirumala is worshipped as Madhukaitabhari, that is, the destroyer of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha. 

The Padma Purana also mentions the story of Bhrigu insulting Lord Vishnu, Vishnu coming down to earth at Tirupati and his being discovered by King Tondaiman. 

According to the Brahmanda Puranam, the Lord of Tirumala is Lord Krishna who fed himself with the milk from the breasts of Putana, a female demon and then destroyed her. He is worshipped in the 'Sri Venkateswara Sahasranamavali' as Vasudeva and as One who delights in eating Navanita or butter. He is the one who delivered the celestials Nalakubara and Manigriva from the curse of the sage Narada. The legend connected with the above is narrated in the Brahma Vaivarta Purana. Other names of Vishnu such as Nandagopa Manohara, Brindaranya Nivasaka, Gopanganachelachoraya, Kaliyaphani darpagna, Rasakridaparayana, Rukmini Nayanotsava, and the connected legends described in the Brahma Vaivarta Purana and the Bhagavata indicate to us that the Lord of Tirumala is no other than Lord Krishna. Similarly, Vishnu names such as Kausalyatanaya, Dasakanta sirodhvamsi etc., in the Brahmanda Purana show that Lord Srinivasa is no other than Sri Rama. The connected legends are too well known to need repetition. 

Shri J.H. Dave mentions a particularly interesting legend regarding the Swami Pushkarini from the Skanda. These legends are reproduced below: 

"Skanda records this story of Dharmagupta, son of King Nanda. The latter in his old age adopted an ascetic life and left the kingdom to his son Dharmagupta. Once, this Dharmagupta while hunting spent some time in a forest at night. A lion pursued him; so the king climbed a tree. A bear also resorted to the same tree out of the fear of the lion who was sitting below, waiting to catch the prey. The king and the bear agreed to remain awake in turn, each for half the night and permit the other to sleep. First, the king slept and the bear protected him, remaining wakeful. In spite of the lion's entreaties to drop the king, the bear remained faithful to its promise to the king. After mid-night it was the king's turn to watch over the sleeping bear. On the lion's entreaties, the faithless king dropped down the bear as prey to the lion. The bear woke up, assumed the form of a yaksha and cursed the king to be mad as penalty for his heinous and criminal breach of trust. His retired father, Nanda, was informed of this. Ultimately, they discovered the Swami Pushkarini late and after a bath in it, it is said, Dharmagupta was cured of his madness which was due to the fact that he had dropped on the ground the bear which was quietly and confidently sleeping, having placed its head and shoulders in the king's lap. 

“A pilgrimage to Venkatachala and a bath in Swami Pushkarini also cured sage Kasyapa of his evil. Even though he had remedies to cure king Parikshit of the serpent-bite of Takshaka, he did not go to cure him and on being bribed by Takshaka with jewels, he returned home from mid-way and Parikshit died of the serpent-bite. Any one who has remedies must cure the sick and the injured till the last moment. 

Skanda, quoting Ayurvedic authorities, gives this tip to doctors and Vaidyas. So long as there is the slightest chance of life, the dying man should be treated with proper remedies; for none knows the crooked ways of Kala.' Kasyapa failed in his duty and he had to make amends." 

