+++
title = "232"
+++
Svarupa-siddhā Sakāmā Rājasī-bhakti 
२३२ । उत्तरा यथा ( भा० ३।२९।९ ) - 
SVARUPA-SIDDHA-BHAKTI prompted by a material motive (sakāmā) and influenced by covetousness and distraction (räjasī) is as described in this verse: 
विषयानभिसन्धाय यश ऐश्वर्यमेव वा । 
अर्चादावर्चयेद् यो मां पृथग्भावः स राजसः ॥ ६७६ ॥ 
A practitioner holding to a separate self-sense (prthag-bhavaḥ), who worships Me in My deity form with a resolve to enjoy sense objects, fame, or opulence, is influenced by the qualitative state of material dynamism (räjasa). (SB 3.29.9)2 
पृथक् मत्तोऽन्यत्र विषयादिष्वेव भावः स्पृहा यस्य न तु मयीति राजसत्वहेतुता दर्शिता ॥ 
The compound prthag-bhavaḥ means "one who (yasya) main- tains a desire (bhavaḥ, i.e., spṛha) for objects that are separate 
1 Sridhara Svāmi glosses the compound prthag-bhavah as bheda-darsi, "one whose vision is rooted in duality." Elaborating on the latter term, Śrīmad Sukadeva glosses prthag-bhavah as "one who, being ignorant of his own true identity as an integrated part of Bhagavan, holds only to the vision of duality" (svasya bhagavad-amsatvam ajanan kevala-bheda-darsi). It is as a consequence of this separate self-sense and dualistic vision that the practitioner is covetous of objects that are separate from or other than Bhagavan, which is the explanation of the same compound given by Jiva Gosvami. 
viṣayan abhisandhaya yasa aisvaryam eva vā 
arcadav arcayed yo mam prthag-bhavaḥ sa räjasaḥ 
112 
232 Svarupa-siddha Sakama Rajasi-bhakti 
from or other than Me, but not for Me" (prthak, i.e., matto'nyatra vişayadiṣv eva na tu mayi). This separate self-sense (prthag- bhavaḥ) is thus shown to be the cause (hetu) of the practitioner's räjasika constitution. 
Commentary 
THIS verse describes the qualitative heart condition of a person influenced by material dynamism (rajas). Rajas fills one with the sense of covetousness to enjoy material objects, which makes it impossible to feel the presence of Bhagavan. To enjoy material objects, one needs to consider oneself independent from Bhagavan. This is called the separate self-sense (prthag-bhava). Such a person does not see that everything belongs to Bhagavan and is a manifes- tation of His energy. Krsna asserts that the fundamental nature of such a person's knowledge is that it is dualistic or pluralistic (prthaktvena): 
But the dualistic knowledge that recognizes a plurality of liv- ing beings of distinct variety in all living forms know that knowledge to be rajasika. (GITĀ 18.21)3 
24 
prthaktvena tu yaj jnanam nana-bhavan prthag-vidhan vetti sarveşu bhutesu taj jnanam viddhi rajasam 
113 
