+++
title = "25 Location"
+++

THE group of hills lying in the shape of a coil called the Tirumala hills,  forms a feature of the region of South India between the 13th and 14th degrees  of north latitude and east longitude 79 degrees.  

The Tirumalai range has seven principal peaks, each of them sacred,  and each of them bearing a separate name accounted for by a fable. Near  one of them, namely Seshachalam, stands the Tirumala temple and the whole  range is often called after this principal peak.  

The Eastern Ghats which, from the northern extremity of the state, run  close to the coast, turn into the interior after passing the river Krishna, and  then break up into a number of parallel ranges of hills, of which, in the region  south of the Krishna and extending southwards to the latitude of Madras,  say roughly 13th degree of north latitude, three parallel ranges are  distinguishable. The range nearest the coast runs more or less straight in  one single range. The second range is an irregular group starting from the  Krishna well below Kumool, and runs down in a semicircle into the Cuddapah  District scattering about in a cluster, one group of which is called Seshachalam  hills; the main range however runs southwards till it makes a further approach  to the coast, coming down as far as Ponneri, a few miles north of Madras.  The third range, more irregular and much lower in point of height, proceeds  northwards from the foot of the Mysore plateau and scatters itself through  Anantapur and Kurnool districts. The central group is what is called  Nallamalais in the Kurnool District, and, as it proceeds southwards from  there, it becomes more definitely something like a single range, and meets  the Eastern range round about the group of hills at Tirupati, Kalahasti, etc  These hills therefore form a feature of the frontier half a degree to the north  of Madras, extending the whole length from the Mysore plateau and stretching  eastwards to almost near the coast at Ponneri, and thus constitute a prominent  feature of the south extremity of Andhra Pradesh.The Hill is but a part of the mountain range designated as the Eastern  Ghats. It may be taken to start from the Anamalais in the extreme south  and to traverse the Coimbatore District, the eastern frontier of Mysore  territory, through the Salem and the present North Arcot Districts, before  entering the Chitoor District at Palamaner. It takes a direction somewhat  east of north up to the Talakona Water Falls, where there is a deflection towards  the east till it reaches Tirumala To the east of Tirumala it ends in a gap  The length of this bit of the Eastern Ghats is about 12 miles between  Talakona and Tirumala, as the crow flies The actual forest path along the  crest of the Hill may be about 20 miles This portion seems to have been  considered very holy from time immemorial. As evidence of this, we see  even today that the Kona (water course) commencing from the Talakona  falls on the extreme west is called the Papavinasanam Kona. The water  course of the eastern end is also called the Papavinasam Kona.  

The Talakona Falls and the Vagu seem to be the natural result of the  wrench which the Hill was subjected to by the sharp tum from north to east.  The level of the hill on the north is about 3,583 feet, east and south about  3,800 feet The waterfall itself which is perennial is about 200 feet The  level country to the west of the hill, is about 1,800 to 2,000 feet above sea  level The valley contains luxuriant ever green forests and presents a good  natural scenery The hill has a sharp slope towards the plains. There is  an ancient Siddheswara shrine on the plains, close to the hill on the west.  This waterfall, being the first one on the hill, is known as the Talakona falls.  

This constituted the ancient border between the Tamil country in the  South and Vadugu, by which name the modern Kannada and Telugu speaking  region, to its north, was then known. Vengadam or the Tirumala hill was a  prominent outpost of this border. The Puranas compare the central range,  mentioned above, to a huge recumbent serpent, and locate the Mallikarjuna  temple of Srisailam on its tail, the Narasimha temple of Ahobilam on its back,  the Sri Venkateswara temple of Tirumala on the back of the hood, and the  Kalahastisvara temple of Kalahasti at the opening of the mouth.  

Tirupati and Tiruchanur are located on a big circular plain surrounded  by a chain of hills on all sides. The Tirumala hills form the northern part  of this  chain and the  town of Tirupati is about two miles to the south of these  hills.  

The hill on which the temple of Sri Venkateswara stands, popularly known  as Venkatachala, is low and surrounded by many hills of a higher altitude,  as is the case with the hill on which is located the Mallikarjuna temple of  Srisailam. There are five well-known paths leading to the temple. Of them,  two routes start from the town of Tirupati, the stepped pathway, seven miles  long, and the motor road, twelve miles long. The third route is from Chandragiri. The fourth starts from the Mamandur Railway Station and  the fifth passes by Nagapatla.  

Intimately associated with the temple of Tirumala are two konas on the  Hill. One is called the Papavinasam (obviously the eastern one) and the  other the Avachari vanka. The former drains the part of the Hill which may  be said to be to the north of the temple and the latter the part to the south,  rather south east, of it. Both are important on account of the many sacred  Tirthams thereon.  

