+++
title = "33 Geological Formations"
+++

The geological formation of the area is of three kinds. The Jewadis,  the Eastern Ghats, and the spurs passing from them-belong to the gneissic  or metamorphic series, and this formation underlies, and occasionally crops  up from beneath, the level plains of the south-east. The hills present a bare  and rugged appearance, being rarely covered with more than a stunted scrub  jungle. Long coarse grass grows everywhere among the rocks, affording  pasturage to the miserable village cattle during the cool season, but during  the dry months the rocks are parched and useless. The villagers then set fire to  the grass, and the conflagrations rapidly spreading destroys the withered blades  and form a fresh soil, from which at the advent of the rains new shoots spring  up. The stunted jungle naturally suffers from such rough treatment, and  wood sufficiently large for building purposes can only be cut in a few localities.  

Associated with the gneissic deposits are found enormous bands of trap,  occurring in the form of dykes. These may often be traced for many miles,  and almost invariably follow a direction from east to west, rising vertically  through the hills that they traverse. The trap rock is very hard, and in  consequence often forms the backbone of lofty ridges of gneissic formation.  

The formation also consists of conglomerates, and sandstones altered  into quartzites, with limestone and volcanic rocks. Near the southern base  of the Tirupati Hills, which resemble those of Nagari, has been found an  extensive bed of soft sandstone, or freestone, several hundred feet in thickness,  and running in a north westerly direction for two or three miles. The stone  is remarkably like the freestone which occurs on the borders of coal fields.  

To these formations may be added the laterite beds of Kalahasti. This  part of the area forms a detached portion near the sea coast, and its geological  features resemble those of the neighbourhood of Madras. The soil consists  of red clayey conglomerates, gravels, and sands, the first predominating.  The conglomerate is of a coarse kind, containing numerous quartzite stones,  waterworn and smooth. The embedded stones are large and numerous in  the neighbourhood of the Nagari rocks, but decrease in size and number  as the distance from those hills increases, till near the coast they are mere  casual pebbles. The laterite when first dug is comparatively soft, but hardens  on exposure to the air, forming an excellent material for revetting tanks or  wells, building houses, or enclosing fields.  

The remarkable and highly picturesque scenery which a pilgrim sees during  various points in ascent is due to the great mural scarps into which the massive  quartzite beds have been worn. The quartzites are generally very massive  and semivitreous in texture, and occur in thick beds, which often show but  little lamination. The prevalent colours of the quartzites are pale greys and  drabs all weathering to shades of buff or pale orange The principal lines  of scarp face the south. In places we find bare walls standing vertically  

The Tirumala hills are composed essentially of sedimentary rocks-Quartzites with intercalated shales, which are given the geological, stratigraphical  nomenclature of Nagari Quartzite. These quartzites rest directly on the  granites and gneisses which form the lower parts of Tirumala hill ranges of  South and West and also constitute the rocks of the minor and major hills  South and West of Tirumala. This Nagari Quartzite forms a part of a major  geological basin ( depositional basin) known as the Cuddapah basin, whose  rocks extend for a large semicircular region, up to Dronachalam in the West,  beyond Srisailam in the North, Jaggayyapeta in the Northeast, and with the hill  ranges of Velikonda along Vinukonda, Udayagiri and Venkatagiri, forming  the eastern margin of the basin. While the granites and gneisses with intrusive  dolerite etc., which form the basement for the basin, are about 2,500 million  years old, the oldest formation of the Cuddapah basin are approximately  1,700 million years old and among them the Nagari Quartzites which are  slightly younger are about 1,500 million years old. This long time gap  between the basement and sedimentary rocks in this region, represented by the  basal conglomerate, is called the Eparchaean Unconformity. This feature was  recently highlighted by the Geological Survey of India by setting up a selected  spot at the base of sedimentary rocks near Tirumala, as a National Geological  Monument. That is located at the 18th km on the new ghat road at the  point where the road reaches the plateau top.  

The Nagari Quartzite whose base is very near the top of the Tirumala  hills at Tirupati, gradually comes down, as the boundary is traced eastwards  and reaches the valley level at the foot of the hills near Kapilathirtham and  goes below ground level further east.  

The granites and gneisses as well as the Nagari Quartzite are cut by several major faults i.e. dislocation of the formation along more or less straight lines and displacement of the block relative to each other on either side of  the plane of disturbance. One such fault runs in SSW-NNE direction  passing right through the Tirumala temple area. Another runs in WSW ENE direction passing through the Avachari vanka. Another major fault  running EW is inferred along the foot of the hills North of Tirupati passing  further east through Karkambadi and Erpedu. The fault zones are usually  locales of seepage of water. The fault at Tirumala has evidently helped in  localising the water sources in the Tirumala-Tirupati area.  

The top parts of the hills of Nagari, Narayanavanam etc. situated in the  area between Swarnamukhi and Arni rivers between Kalahasthi and Puttur at  the east and southeast of Tirupati, are composed of the same formation, i.e.  Nagari Quartzite; while the lower parts of bills and valleys are composed of  granites and gneisses. The depositional limits of the Cuddapah basin rocks  extend considerably to the South and Southeast of Tirumala-Tirupati area,  and the rocks exposed in the hills of Nagari and Narayanavanam are now  isolated by faulting and erosion.  

While the hill ranges of the Tirumala form vertical cliffs, the hills of  granites and gneisses are ranged to a large extent. This is because of the  difference in the nature of the rocks. While the quartzites are gently sloping,  bedded rocks, where the vertical jointing has resulted in the formation of  cliff's, the granites and gneisses are large masses, whose uniform nature has  resulted in different types of mounds. Moreover, the granites are more easily  weathered and eroded than the quartzites, which are resistant to chemical  weathering. Thus in many areas the quartzites have formed a protective  cover on the granites and prevented their complete erosion.  

The agents of erosion have carved a 'Natural Arch' in the Nagari  Quartzite, in the area northwest of Tirumala Temple. This is a gift of nature  to the Shrine of Lord Venkatesvara. This is interesting to a layman  and important to a scientist. Hence, this rare gift of nature is to be  preserved as a National Monument.  

The faulting as well as the folding of the rocks further east of Tirumala area, has deformed them into faulted structures, anticlines and synclines and formation of linear hill ranges. In contrast, the western part of Tirumala and further northwest where the rocks are only tilted and faulted retain  their general slopes and are widespread.  

