+++
title = "37 Fauna"
+++

The forests of the district, especially those of Tirupati and Bhakarapet  ranges even before their reservation, were reported to be rich, both in flora  and fauna. Legions of birds and animals were reported to have found in them a good abode and lived an unbridled and poised life. Mr. Jean Baptiste Travernier a French traveller and jewel merchant who passed through these forests on 27-8-1652 has written in his chronicles that the "place  is very pleasant and derives its coolness from numerous streams and fountains "  and that elephant capturing operations were then being conducted in these  hills by one of the captains of Mir Jumla's army. This may appear rather  difficult to believe to those acquainted with the present condition of the forests and the fauna existing therein now, but it may not be far from truth, if we  can visualize the amount of havoc which could have been caused by man  to the once dense forests during the past three centuries. Not only have the  big game like elephants, bison etc , disappeared, but even carnivora like tigers and panthers, not to speak of Cheetahs, are greatly depleted and  almost extinct. Other common forms of wild life such as sambhurs and  spotted deers are also frightfully reduced and one rarely sees them in herds.  The opening of extensive unreserves around all forest reserves for cultivation, forming new highways passing through or along Nagapatla, Bhakarapet,  Tirupati, Mamandur and Napier RF. and the advent of fast moving vehicles  and the jeeps that can cruise the rugged forest tracts, the proliferation of  unlicensed weapons and coming of cheap and poisonous poison drugs like  endrine etc , and man's unsportive desire for ruthless destruction of wild  beasts, have all cumulatively contributed to the present sad state of affairs  of reduction in the rate and varied fauna in the forests. Today even the  harmless peacocks are reduced in numbers. To give the much harassed  wild life a chance to recoup, all the forests in the district were closed to shooting  from 1962.  

The incidence of horned game is much in Tirupati ranges where the locality  factors are quite congenial for their living.  

