+++
title = "38 Birds"
+++

The bird life in general may be considered to be in much better shape  in the tract as the poachers had not concentrated much in their destruction  and the birds protecting themselves better by their flight and smallness in  size than quadrupeds. A number of species exist in the tract whose number  swells in the winter by swarms of migratory birds. Among the Babblers, the  Large Grey Babbler *(Tindoides malcolmi*) is the common one. The Shrikes,  like the Large Grey Shrike *(Lanis excubitor*), can be seen hawking insects among the main highways in the district and help to keep down the insect  population that crop-up during and after rains. The king-crow, Mynas  and Crows are always attendant on cattle snapping up insects. These and a  host of other birds like the Warblers, Bee-eaters, Hoopoes, Swifts etc., all  help in keeping down the insect population which would otherwise cause  untold harm to the crops. Vultures like the White-Breasted and Long-billed  keep the countryside clean of carcasses and are to be found practically all  over the area. The other predatory birds are the Eagles, Kites and owls  which keep the rodent population under check. Among the game birds,  mention may be made of Sandgrouse, Quails, Partridges, green pigeons and pigeons, which are trapped by local villagers and Yenadis. A large number  of water fowl visit the numerous tanks in the district in the winter season.  Mention may be made of various ducks like spot-bills, pintails and pochards.  The Chinnagottigallu tank in winter is always found with these ducks. Among  the teals, the whistling teals are found in all seasons while the cotton and  Blue-winged teals are found in other seasons. The paddy fields attract a number of Herons and Egrets at all times. The peacock (*Pavo cristatus*)  is present still in Tirupati, Bhakarapet, Madanapalli and Palamaner Ranges,  and quite often it may be seen crossing the Tirumala ghat road in the evening  between the 6th and 7th mile. Parakeets, grey jungle fowls, and Weaver birds are also found in plenty in all the class-I reserves in the district.  

