+++
title = "04 The Emperor’s Career Portrayed on the Prakara Wall"

+++





## **The Career of Nandivarman Pallavamalla**

Around 731 the “emperor of Pallava kings in the Pallava lineage” died after a three-year reign. He has been identified as Parameshvaravarman II \(728–731\), a descendent of Paramesvaravarman I \(672–700\) through Narasimhavarman Rajasimha \(700–728\). His death may have been connected to the invasion of Kanchipuram by the Chalukya crown prince Vikramaditya II.1 The Sanskrit praise poem \(*prashasti*\) of a grant by Nandivarman ca. 752 says the deceased ruler’s father was Rajasimha, an emperor famous as a Supreme Maheshvara \(*paramamaheshvara*\) piously devoted to Brahmins \(*parabrahmanyah*\) \(*SII* 2: 366, line 17\). This title means Rajasimha had received consecration \(*diksha*\) according to the branch of Shaiva Agama known in his time as Shaiva Siddhanta. Rajasimha’s sons did not leave an undisputed lineal descendant, and political anarchy followed. Since no Pallavan in Kanchipuram could claim undisputed succession, some members of the court went a long distance to find one to restore the “pure” line descending from Simhavarman II, who had reigned ca. 535–580. They found such a person in a twelve-year-old boy, the youngest son of Hiranyavarman, who had descended from Simhavarman II through his second son, Bhima. Bhima had left Kanchipuram to establish his own court, and Hiranya was his descendent in the fifth generation. He was considered “pure” on his father and mother’s sides and was a worshiper of Vishnu. Hiranya could not take up the position in Kanchipuram, however, but he allowed the fourth of his four Malla sons to assume the position. Hiranya’s Malla sons, it appears, were those born to his first wife; they continued the “purity” of lineage signified by the title of Malla, which means “wrestler.” This Malla son was named Pallava, or Pallavamalla. As a descendent of Simhavarman, the boy qualified as “purified” \(*parisuddha*\) in both his paternal and maternal clans and, in addition, he was willing to leave his father’s court and go to Kanchipuram.

The delegates had traveled a long way to find a successor to the throne, passing through many mountains, rivers, forests, and “depths \(*gahana*\).”2 K. R. Srinivasan says they found him in a collateral Pallava line in Kongu, inland and southwest of the Pallava realm, implying that *gahana* means armies, not seas. But T. V. Mahalingam interprets *gahana* as seas and argues that they went much farther afield, to a Pallava domain in Kambujadesa, known today as Cambodia. We shall discuss that question later. Wherever they found the boy, he came from a Vaishnava, or more precisely Bhagavata, family. At his father’s court was an elderly scholar of Agama \(*agamika*\) named Tarandikonda Bhojar, who told the king not to grieve at his son’s departure, because “He has been a worshiper of the Transcendent Vishnu \(*mahavishnu*\) and will become an emperor \(*chakravartin*\).”3

Not all Pallavas were Mallas, for some were born of Pallava fathers and “impure” mothers, which appears to have been the case with the rival claimant to the Kanchipuram throne, whose name was probably Skandasishya Vikramavarman. When the delegation bringing the “pure” Malla drew near to Kanchipuram, supporters of his rival met them with violent opposition, but were defeated and many were killed. Skanda fled the city, but did not abandon his fight for the throne. The delegation then brought Pallavamalla into the city for his abhisheka or unction. The Brahmin ghatika or learned assembly, which was responsible for anointing Kanchipuram’s rulers, in an act of religious and political significance gave him the coronation name Nandivarman. He was, this title claimed, the “son” of the first Nandivarman, the Supreme Bhagavata who two centuries earlier had fathered the royal Malla lineage now reinstated on Kanchipuram’s throne by Nandivarman Pallavamalla.

There was a religious dimension to the search for a “pure” Pallava, which is not surprising given political issues of patronage and religious beliefs regarding the divine source of royal power. Until the death of Nandivarman’s predecessor, Kanchipuram’s more recent emperors had patronized the Shaiva Agama; Rajasimha had been consecrated a Supreme Maheshvara and his great temple recorded his commitment to the Saiva Siddhanta Path \(*SII* 1: 12, stanza 5\). After Nandivarman established himself firmly on the throne, he balanced Rajasimha’s mountainous abode for Shiva on the city’s western side with his own palace for the Bhagavan on the eastern side. These two eighth-century temples record differing beliefs regarding God as King \(*devaraja*\). For Rajasimha, devaraja was the Shiva linga inside the sanctum of his divine palace; for Nandivarman, devaraja was the Vasudeva icon sitting inside his divine palace. A Supreme Bhagavata had replaced a Supreme Maheshvara on the Pallava throne.

Once installed on the throne, Nandivarman Pallavamalla was now an Indra of Men \(*nara-indra, narendra*\). But why did he receive the name Nandivarman? The answer is found in two differing statements about his lineage. The prakara inscription discussed below says he was the son of Hiranyavarman. But a grant of ca. 752–753 says Pallavamalla Nandivarman “became his son” \(*tasya putro babhuva*\), which appears to refer to his immediate predecessor, Parameshvaravarman II \(*SII* 2: 365–367, lines 19 and 37\). To account for the apparent discrepancy between descent from Hiranyavarman and from Parameshvaravarman II, E. Hultzsch suggested that the grant might be a forgery, or that Nandivarman “thought it political” to claim to be the adopted son of his predecessor, or that the scribe who drafted the inscription used the word *putra* \(son\) carelessly to represent Nandivarman as Parameshvaravarman’s successor and not biological heir \(*SII* 2: 363\).

But the prashasti statement “became his son” appears before and after a long prose passage \(containing a portion in three stanzas of verse\) eulogizing “Nandivarman the Master of Pallavas.” This Nandivarman is not Pallavamalla, but the Supreme Bhagavata after whom he was named. The phrase “Pallavamalla Nandivarman became his son” refers to a ceremony that made him the legitimate heir to the throne in the line descending from the first Nandivarman rather than in the line descending from Parameshvaravarman I through Rajasimha and his heir Parameshvaravarman II.4 The claim by the elderly agamika in the prakara inscription that Pallavamalla had been a worshiper of Maha Vishnu and would become a chakravartin may mean that people believed Pallavamalla to be the rebirth of the first Nandi.

This first Nandi had ruled seven generations earlier as “Shri Nandivarman, the great king of Dharma of the Pallavas belonging to the Bharadvaja gotra, a supreme Bhagavata devoted to the feet of the bappa bhattaraka.”5 As we shall later see, *bappa bhattaraka* refers to the acharya of Agama. The first Nandivarman ruling Kanchipuram, therefore, was a Supreme Bhagavata devoted to the feet of an acharya of the Pancharatra Agama, as were his heirs. His son Simhavarman II continued to rule \(ca. 535–560\) in Kanchipuram, as did his eldest son, Simhavishnuvarman \(ca. 560–580\), and their Bhagavata line continued until 672. But Bhima, Simhavarman’s younger son, went elsewhere to establish his court \(*SII 2:* 506\), and his patronage of Pancharatra acharyas apparently continued down to Hiranya’s reign early in the eighth century. This explains the presence in his court of the elderly agamika, Tarandikonda Bhojar, who must have been Hiranya’s acharya.

In Kanchipuram, however, acharya patronage shifted in the court. Pallava emperors from Paramesvaravarman I \(672–700\) until the dynastic crisis ca. 731 were devoted to Shaiva acharyas. Apparently, the only way to restore a “pure” Pallava lineage of Bhagavatas to Kanchipuram’s throne was to find a ruler belonging to an unbroken lineage of “pure” devotion to Pancharatra acharyas descending from the glorious Bhagavata ancestor, Nandivarman, living in a court somewhere else. That was Bhima’s court, where Hiranya ruled. This important memory of clan commitment to an acharya lineage was not unusual then, nor is it now. The Alvar poet Vishnuchittan \(Periyalvar\) says that he came from seven generations of devotees, and he may have used seven to symbolize an even larger number \(*Tiruppallantu* 3\). Sri Vaishnavas in contemporary India follow the Pancharatra Agama and keep careful record of their acharyas in order to trace their discipleship back to the acharya named Ramanuja in the twelfth century. Nandivarman, who firmly believed Bhagavata Dharma was fundamental to his reign, appears to have been steadfastly committed to his acharya and his acharya’s family, as we shall see.



### ***First Exile***

Modern interpretations of Nandivarman Pallavamalla’s reign of sixty-four or sixty-five years differ in the ways they piece together the fragmentary information available in the sources. T. V. Mahalingam conducted the most detailed analysis, and we shall follow his lead here, supplemented by other interpretations.

As noted earlier, the Chalukya crown prince, Vikramadiyta II, invaded Kanchipuram sometime around 731. After Nandivarman ascended the throne, Vikramaditya invaded again, about 733–734, not long after he had been anointed the Chalukya king.6 Vikramaditya invaded Kanchipuram this time, Mahalingam suggests, to avenge the death of the rival to the Kanchipuram throne, whom he had supported and who had been killed by Nandivarman’s forces on their way to the city. The Rajasimheshvara Temple that Rajasimha had completed about a decade earlier impressed Vikramadiyta II. He was a devotee of Shiva and after he inspected the temple’s wealth he returned it all to Shiva and added gifts of his own.7 He presumably left Kanchipuram in the hands of his Pallava protégé, who was probably Skandasishya Vikramavarman. Nandivarman later called him, perhaps derisively, the “wonderously made Pallava king” \(*chitramaya pallavaraja*\) \(Foulkes in *IA* 8: 275, line 48\).

Nandivarman fled Kanchipuram and remained in exile for twelve to fourteen years, during which he aligned himself with the Rashtrakutas at their court in the Deccan. The Rashtrakutas patronized Jainas. Nandivarman eventually married Reva, the daughter of the Rashtrakuta king, Dantidurga. Their son Dantivarman became Nandivarman’s heir \(see stanzas 15–17 in *SII* 2: 511\). As we discussed in chapter 1, the Jaina heritage of Dantivarman’s maternal line may account for the *Bhagavata Purana’s* telling of the story of the tirthankara named Rishabha.

It appears that during Nandivarman’s long exile he also found support among the chieftains of agricultural lands \(*mutarayar, muttaraiyar*\) in the ancient Chola realm of the Kaveri River delta to the south. Mutaraiyars of the Khataka clan had been among those who escorted Pallavamalla into Kanchipuram for his unction; and muttaraiyars aligned themselves with Nandivarman throughout his career and participated in the most crucial of his battles \(Govindasamy 1965: 39–44\). Before the middle of the eighth century, a town among the muttaraiyars had become Pallavamalla’s “subcapital” \(*anupura*\) and the locale of that pivotal battle. It was probably “Nandi’s Town” \(Nandipuram, Nandigrama\), adjacent to the town of Paraiyarai, a Chola residence in the region of modern Kumbhakonam.8

According to Mahalingam’s reconstruction, Vikramaditya II had placed \(or replaced\) Skandasishya Vikramavarman on the Kanchipuram throne after his second invasion ca. 733–734. We know that Skandasishya ruled from Kanchipuram as late as 745–746, because in that year he granted a village in what is now North Arcot District to a Brahmin who may have been his acharya.9 Little is known about Skandasishya, but he may have been one of Rajasimha’s sons or grandsons by a secondary wife. His own account of his lineage says he descends from Ashvatthaman and “a woman with a double tongue” \(*dvijiha-amgini*\) who gave birth to the first Skandasishya. She has been interpreted as a naga \(Line 8 and stanzas 2 and 3 in *EI* 5.8: 51–52\), which denotes both a snake and a person of low socio-ritual status. This naga maternal ancestor suggests that Skandasishya belonged to the clan of “Kanchi’s Owner” \(*kacchiyon*\), which ruled the city prior to their intermarriage with Pallavas in the fourth century. The kacchiyon will appear again later. In any case, Pallavamalla’s supporters considered Skandasishya “wonderously made” and not pure enough to rule. In contrast, other Pallava accounts, including those of Pallavamalla, say that Ashvatthaman’s descendant was the first Pallava, not the first Skandasishya, and that his mother was an apsaras, a dancer in Indra’s heavenly court. The difference between a naga mother and an apsaras mother suggests the difference in ritual class \(*varna*\) between rulers judged by Veda to be Shudras of low status \(*naga*\) and Shudras of high status \(*apsaras*\).

Skandasishya had other political weaknesses, too. Through the Western Gangas he had aligned himself with the Chalukyas of Vatapi and received the support of the invading Vikramaditya II. He also received support from other traditional Pallava foes, most notably the Pandyan named Maravarman Rajasimha \(730–765\). Like Skandasishya, the Chalukyan Vikramaditya and the Pandyan Maravarman Rajasimha were Shaivas. Skandasishya would not have been a sympathetic figure to many Pallava subrulers living in the muttaraiyar region over which the Pandyas and Pallavas often fought and where Nandivarman’s subcapital lay.



### ***Nandivarman Becomes Bhagavata Emperor, Second Exile***

Nandivarman returned from exile in 745 or 746. His Rashtrakuta father-in-law, Dantidurga, invaded Kanchipuram and surrounded the city with his troops. Skandasishya fled. Dantidurga’s purpose, Mahalingam believes, was to oust Skandasishya and restore Nandivarman to the throne. In that year Nandivarman received a Bhagavata consecration that gave him the Tamil title “Great Being’s Venerable Slave” \(*perumanatikal*\), analogous to “Bhagavan’s Supreme Slave” \(*paramabhagavata*\) borne by the first Nandivarman \(Mahalingam 1969: 169\). Nandivarman had finally obtained true being \(*satya*\) as “King of Kings and Emperor” \(*raja-adhiraja-parameshvara*\). But his difficulties were by no means over.

Vikramaditya responded to Skandasishya’s ouster by sending his son, the Chalukya crown prince Kirtivarman, to Kanchipuram. He went in his father’s name, to make it the third time Vikramadiyta invaded the city. Once again Nandivarman left, and Kirtivarman gathered Kanchipuram’s wealth for his father. Nandivarman returned shortly thereafter, in 746 or 747.10 Nandivarman then waged war against Skandasishya, and the crucial battle took place at Nandi’s Town \(Nandipuram\) among the muttaraiyars to the south. Nandivarman was camped in Nandipuram when Skandasishya and his supporting Dramila forces attacked. His general, Udayachandra, rescued him by killing Skandasishya with his sword and routing the Dramilas. Skandasishya died sometime between 747 and 753, probably earlier rather than later.

After Udayachandra had killed Skandasishya and won other battles, Nandivarman ruled firmly in Kanchipuram until his death in 795–796. Toward the end, his son Dantivarman appears to have ruled with him as crown prince \(*yuvaraja*\). Battles along his borders continued, of course, and his enemies included the Pandyas, the Gangas, the waning Chalukyas, and the rising Rashtrakutas. Nandivarman fought at least seven battles with the Pandyas, and late in his career \(about 783\) at least one with the Rashtrakutas, despite their alliance through marriage.11

According to Burton Stein, Nandivarman Pallavamalla shifted the language in which Pallavas talked of their royal authority. He replaced legitimacy based on descent from kings who had performed Vedic sacrifices to legitimacy based on generous ritual gifts \(*dana*\) that redistributed the resources of their realm. The prashasti of a grant dated 754–755, however, suggests that dana as an important source of legitimacy had begun nearly a century earlier with Mahendravarman II \(668–670\), for Nandivarman’s court remembered him as the one who began sponsoring temples and Brahmins and used the donor’s vessel in rites of giving \(*dana*\) \(*SII* 2: 349, line 56 and note\). It may even have begun with the first Nandivarman.

The ritual gift \(*dana*\) is a cardinal virtue for kings who follow Agama, including Buddhist rulers with whom Nandivarman’s lineage claimed affinity through descent from the emperor Ashoka \(*SII* 2: 347, line 33\). The Chinese Buddhist monk Hsuan Tsang reported that the Buddhist emperor Harshavardhana and his predecessors followed the practice in the sixth and seventh centuries, probably in imitation of the quinquennial \(*panchavarsika*\) great acts of dana attributed to Ashoka \(Strong 1983: 91–96\). Regional rulers like the muttaraiyar responded to these gifts by acknowledging loyalty to the giver as they retained their own status of localized dominion \(Stein 1980: 296–297\). This type of relationship sheds light on the loyalty of the ruler of Mangai, a Bhagavata in the old Chola region who calls himself Kalikanri and Kaliyan in his poems, but is more commonly known as the Alvar poet Tirumangai. He is an important source for this study, and two pieces of evidence allow us to date him.

The first is a grant of land Nandivarman made in the sixty-first year of his reign \(792–793\) to sixteen Brahmins in order to form a village in what is now the Nagapattinam Taluk of Tanjore District.12 He made it at the request of a man named in the Sanskrit portion of the prashasti as Mangalarashtra-bharitri and in the Tamil portion as Mangalanatalvan, both of which mean “ruler of the Mangala Country.” Kalikanri ruled Mangala, or Mangai, which is why he came to be known as Tirumangai.

The second piece of evidence is about his son. R. Nagaswamy reports a memorial stone found in Karur dated to the eighth or ninth century CE, which is when the Pallavas dominated this ancient Chera capital. Its inscription is in Tamil and records the death in Karur of “the son of the king Kaliyan” while rescuing his cattle \(Nagaswamy 1995: 89–90\). It is possible that this man was the son of the same Kaliyan or Kalikanri who ruled Mangalanatu \(Mangai\) and had requested land on behalf of sixteen Brahmins. Kalikanri, who composed more stanzas of Tamil poetry than any other Alvar, thus appears to have been a minor ruler subordinate to Nandivarman Pallavamalla, and to have flourished in the last half of the eighth century and perhaps into the ninth.



## **The Prakara Wall and the Sculpted Lions**

The prakara wall, which defines the outermost boundary of the temple’s mandala, creates the division between ritual impurity on the outside and ritual purity on the inside, and between the darkness of ignorance and the light of knowledge. Numerous Pallava-style lions on its exterior surface face outward toward impurity and ignorance as if to ward off these defilements from the structure \(Figure I.1\). These lions are of the same style as those inside the mandala. Lions carved on the pillars supporting the roof of the circumambulatory face inward toward the “moat” and the vimana; lions carved on the vimana face outward toward the “moat” and the circumambulatory. Two drawings \(Figure 4.1\) depict them as they appear on the pillars inside.




FIGURE 4.1. Pallava-style lions. From Rea 1909.


Why are these many Pallava-style lions placed inside and outside the temple? Are they merely adornments, or do they have ritual significance? Sculptural and textual evidence suggests an answer: When the completed temple received its complete consecration \(*kumbhabhisheka*\) these lions embodied the brilliant conquering power \(*tejas*\) of Goddess Durga, for the lion is her mount \(*vahana*\). In the *Devi Mahatmyam* \(Glorification of the Goddess\), the seer Markandeya tells the story of Goddess Durga as the embodiment of conquering tejas or power. She first defeats the anti-deva asura named Buffalo \(which gives her the title Mahishasuramardini\), and then the asuras Chanda and Munda \(which gives her the title Chandika\). Episodes of this story are richly illustrated in seventh-century stone monuments at the Pallava port Mamallapuram. One of these is a freestanding carving of Durga’s lion facing west, as illustrated in Figure 4.2. Goddess Durga sitting on the head of the asura Buffalo has been sculpted inside the chest of her lion mount: Durga sits with her left foot on Buffalo’s head and her right foot on the ground. On the lion’s exterior surface Durga’s female companions sit in similar postures facing north and south. This sculpted arrangement visually depicts the doctrine that Durga’s lion embodies the conquering tejas she embodies; the lion is an extension of the Goddess, just as we find in the *Devi Mahatmyam*. Accordingly, Pallava-style lions on the outside and the inside of the Emperor’s Vishnu-house may be understood to have embodied Durga’s brilliant conquering power to preserve the purity of this three-dimensional mandala built to be God’s residence.




FIGURE 4.2. Lion at Mamallapuram \(left\) with Durga the Slayer of Buffalo inside its chest \(right\). Photo by Hudson, 1998.




## ******Nandivarman’s Career Depicted**

The official story of Pallavamalla’s accession to the throne told at the time the temple was built, ca. 770, appears in sculpted panels illustrating the entire history of the Pallava Dynasty. The sculpted history occupies two parallel registers on all four side of the prakara. It begins at the north side of the temple entrance and moves clockwise. The panels devoted to Pallavamalla constitute the single longest sequence and include the top register on the entire south wall and both registers on the west wall’s southern half. The sequence concludes with the depiction of Nandivarman Pallavamalla enthroned with his general, his acharya, his cultic instruments, and conclusive battles in the Kaveri River delta. A convincing interpretation of the hundreds of scenes depicted in detail by this sculpted program remains to be done, but C. Minakshi provides an excellent beginning \(Minakshi 1941\). The bottom register of sculpted panels on the south prakara wall follows a counterclockwise sequence that ends at the southeast corner. They remain unexplored.13

Thirteen inscriptions, written in a mixture of Tamil and Sanskrit resembling the Manipravala of the later Sri Vaishnavas \(see Venkatachari 1978\), identify specific sculpted panels illustrating Nandivarman’s story at the beginning of the south wall. They are the only inscriptions in the temple that date from Nandivarman’s rule.14 Each inscription ends with the word *itam*, meaning “place,” to denote a specific panel or set of panels as the place where the event described is portrayed; for example, “that event is depicted in this place \(*itam*\).” Kalikanri uses *itam* the same way in his poem about the temple and Nandivarman.



### *******The First Ten Labels of the Inscription***

Not all of the inscription’s thirteen labels are readable. The series begins with the death of Kanchipuram’s ruler in 731, describes the search for a new king, and records Pallavamalla’s acceptance of the position at the age of twelve. It then records his journey to Kanchipuram, his conflict with opponents outside the city, their defeat, and his entrance into the city. The tenth label then records his unction. I have translated the first ten labels as follows.15

1.The emperor of Pallava kings, who belonged to the Pallava lineage which had descended in this way \[as portrayed in the previous prakara panels\] became a resident of heaven and the realm was reduced to anarchy. The mattrakal, members of the ghatika \(*ghatakayar*\), and a ruler who is the basis of the mandala realm \(*mulaprakriti*\)16 then approached Hiranyavarma Maharaja of the Katava Ruler’s clan \(*katavesha kula*\) to ask him to become king. He was able to bear the burden of the kingdom and was purified in both clans \(*ubhayakula-parishuddhar*\). \[That is depicted\] here \(*itam*\).

2.The deputies arrived and met Hiranyavarma Maharaja. “Why have you come?” he asked. “The kingdom is in anarchy and unable to manage,” they said. “You are purified in both clans and should be king.” \[That is depicted\] here.

3.Hearing this, Hiranyavarma Maharaja sent for all the clan’s Wrestlers \(*kulamallar*\) to ask who would go. He then asked his sons named Srimalla, Ranamalla, Samkramamalla, and Pallavamalla who among them was available. Each said, “You should rule, we will not go,” until the Pallava who is our emperor bowed down and said, “I will go.” \[That is depicted\] here.

4.Hearing this, he was happy that the good and truthful son born to enhance the glory of the Khataka clan was going to rule, but grieved about the separation, feeling amrita and poison in his heart \(*hridaya*\) at the same time. “My son is a boy of only twelve years,” he said, “and I will not send him.” Then the elder scholar of Agama \(*agamika*\) named Tarandikonda Bhojar \(*posar*\) reassured him when he said, “He has been a worshiper of Transcendent Vishnu \(Mahavishnu\) and will become an emperor \(*chakravartin*\). You should not grieve.” \[That is depicted\] here.

5.\[This inscription is fragmentary. Hiranyavarman appears to have seen something that resembled a black elephant’s head \(*kariyakalirinra*\[*la*\]*y*\) and asked a question about it.\]

6.Tarandikonda Bhojar showed the object presented by the attendant \(*sevakan*\) and said to Hiranyavarma Maharaja, “This is not an elephant’s head \(*kalirinralay*\). These are the parts of your son’s crown \(*mukutankal*\).” And \[the king’s\] fear vanished. \[That is depicted\] here.

7.This is where Hiranyanvarma Maharaja and Tarandikonda Bhojar gave \[Pallavamalla\] permission to go and he descended from the balcony \(*chivikai*\), venerated them, prostrated to them, and took leave \[as depicted\] here.17

8.Starting from there he traveled the way and left behind many mountains, rivers, forests, and depths \(*gahana*\). Hearing of this, many eminent noble men \(*palla-v-atikar-aiyar*\) \[or the Pallavadi Araiyar\]18 went out to attack him with great force \(*mahabalam*\), struck, killed elephants, and died near the great city of Kanchipuram \[as depicted\] here.

9.Hearing that his elephant was approaching \[the city\], the superior dependent rulers \(*mahasamantar*\), the leading citizens \(*nagarattar*\), a sovereign who is the basis of the mandala realm \(*mulaprakriti*\), and the Khatakka rulers of agricultural lands \(*mutarayar*\) went out to meet him and escort him into the palace \(*koyil*\) \[as depicted\] here.

10.After they entered the palace the assembly of ministers \(*mantrimandalam*\), the superior dependent rulers, the men of the two assemblies \(*ubhyaganattayar*\), and the members of the ghatika \(*ghatakayar*\) anointed him with the name Nandivarman. Then, for display, slaves gathered the chariot’s karivai umbrella, \[the conch\] with the voice of the sea \(*samudraghosham*\), the khatvanga staff \(*khatvangad-dhvajam*\), and the bull crest \(*vrishaba-lanchanam*\). After the Vitelvituku oath of majesty \(*tiruvanai*\)19 was administered the unction was completed \[as depicted\] here.



### ***The Depiction of the Unction as Indra of Men***

The tenth label translated above identifies the depiction of the unction \(*abhisheka*\) that completed the transformation of the boy Pallavamalla into the Indra of Men \(*narendra*\) after he received the name Nandi and the warrior title varman \(shield\) \(Figure 4.3\). The final unction or bath completed his ritual birth as an Indra through the ancient ceremony of king engendering \(*rajasuya*\). The rajasuya described here imitated the paradigm established by Varuna, which the first emperor, named Prithu son of Vena, enacted, as did Harischandra, whose famous story is told during the ceremony.




FIGURE 4.3. Pallavamalla’s unction as Nandivarman ca. 731. Photo by Sathya Sedan.


The panel is divided horizontally into two sections. Seven male figures fill the upper section, four to the west and three to the east. They face forward with knees and bodies bent in a manner that suggests relaxed movement. The third figure from the viewer’s right appears to be playing cymbals, indicating that the group is singing in the well-known bhakti manner of bhajan or sankirtana.

The bottom section is divided vertically into two halves. The large figure of Pallavamalla dominates the western half. He sits upright and gazes forward. His pendant legs are spread apart, his feet rest on a footstool probably placed on a tiger skin, and his hands rest on his thighs. He wears armbands and necklaces, and an elaborate waistcloth with strands hanging down between his legs. A cord appears to descend from each side of his head, along each shoulder, to cross the center of his bare chest and pass under the opposite arm. These garments probably represent the womb from which he is born. According to the *Shatapatha Brahmana’s* account of the rajasuya, one garment is the amnion, “the inner caul of kshatra.” Another is the chorion, “the outer caul of kshatra.” A third is “the womb of kshatra.” A headband or turban serves as “the navel of kshatra.” In the sculpture the headband appears to wrap around Pallavamalla’s forehead to descend as the cords crossing his chest; it probably denotes the umbilicus.

Two smaller figures behind him on each side raise their hands toward the top of Pallavamalla’s head. The hair of his head is piled up as a cone exposed above the headband or turban wrapped around his forehead. The sculpture is damaged, and it is difficult to see what the two side figures hold up, but they must be wooden vessels containing the unction mixture of seventeen fluids. The rajasuya prescribes four such bowls. The figure on Pallavamalla’s right is captured in the act of pouring the mixture over his hair so that it will run down his front. The figure on his left has raised his bowl to continue the “sprinkling.” It is important that the unction mixture first touches his hair, which thenceforth will contain its vigor.

On the panel’s eastern half, six men face the viewer. Three sit in front and three stand behind them. The inscription below the panel tells us that the body of ministers, the superior dependent rulers, the members of the two assemblies, and the members of the ghatika first anointed Pallavamalla with the name Nandivarman. Slaves then gathered together the emblems of his rule for display: the karivai umbrella for his chariot, the conch with the voice of the sea, the khatvanga staff, and the bull crest. He then took the Vitelvituku oath of kingship and received the concluding “bath” depicted in this sculpted scene.

The identification of figures in the panel with the groups named in the label is uncertain, but their listing according to rank provides a plausible identification. The assembly of ministers who advise the king appears as the three figures seated to Nandivarman’s right. Behind them stand three figures representing the superior dependent rulers. Above them stand seven figures representing the members of the two assemblies; one group consists of four on the west and the other of three on the east. The meaning of “assembly” \(*gana*\) in the context of Nandivarman’s court is uncertain, yet the statement made about Nandivarman in his grant of 753–754—”whose might is increasing in consequence of \(his\) meditations on the feet of the bappa-bhattaraka”—suggests that these two ganas consisted of agamika Brahmins divided between the Pancharatra and the Shaiva Agamas.

There is no reason to think a Bhagavata emperor in Kanchipuram would not have patronized Shaivas. Nandivarman’s predecessor Rajasimha \(and perhaps his son\) had been consecrated a Maheshvara, Nandivarman’s general Udayachandra was devoted to Shiva, and Bhagavata theology and liturgy subsume the Shaiva Agama, as we shall see in the following chapters. In the panel, the assembly of Pancharatra Brahmins probably appears as the four men directly above Pallavamalla, because they received his primary patronage. The assembly of Shaiva Brahmins appears as the three men to their right, who received his secondary patronage. Significantly, all seven appear to be singing, and singing one’s devotion is a characteristic rite of both Agamas, as the Tamil hymns of the Alvars and Nayanars of this period make abundantly clear.

This leaves the members of the ghatika. The two men pouring the unction fluids over Pallavamalla’s hair represent them. A ghatika in southern India of this period was a center of learning. Kanchipuram’s ghatika, crucial to Pallava kingship at least since the fourth century,20 was widely honored as a center of advanced Vedic knowledge.21 The Brahmins of the ghatika were responsible for Veda \(*vaidika*\), and their dharma was to perform the rajasuya for the ruler. Agamika Brahmins also provided an acharya for the newborn Indra, guided the building of his temples, provided priests, fostered his bhakti, and performed rites combining Veda and Agama on behalf of his rule. Perhaps these functional divisions between vaidikas and agamikas represented two distinctly different groups of Brahmins with different dharmas, but the ghatika must have included both and differences between them were not absolute; vaidikas also followed Agama, just as agamikas followed Veda. Moreover, vaidikas presumably could not perform a rajasuya for a ruler belonging to a low-status ritual class unless he had already been purified through Agama consecration. Kanchipuram’s ghatika may be understood as a college of Vedagama, which is the term Arumuga Navalar used for his Shaiva schools in the nineteenth century.22



### ***The. Elephant-head Crown***

The ghataka assembly had the authority in Kanchipuram to make a ruler into an Indra of Men. The fifth label of the inscription records this Indra status. When the delegation left Kanchipuram to look for a properly pure heir to the throne, they carried something that to Hiranyavarman looked like a black elephant head. His resident agamika, however, explained that what he thought was an elephant’s head were the parts of his son’s crown. Some scholars have conjectured that the elephant-like crown signified ancient Pallava connections with the Parthians \(Minakshi 1977: 40ff.\), but it more likely represented Indra’s elephant Airavata. This meaning not only matches the description of the consecrated Pallavan as an Indra of Men but also finds support from Barabudur in Java.

Construction of the Vajrayana Buddhist monument of Barabudur began a few decades after this temple was completed and in a region of Java where Pallavas had long been influential.23 According to Jan Fontein, Indra \(more commonly called Shakra in Buddhist texts\) is portrayed in a Barabudur relief in the company of his attendant Airavata, “recognizable by the elephant hood which he wears and his ankusa or elephant hook.”24 The elephant hood includes an elephant’s trunk and ears.25 In the sixth label of our prakara inscription, the attendant \(*sevakan*\) is described as holding the elephant-head crown containing parts that puzzled Hiranyavarman, which would be the trunk and ears. The attendant holding the crown in Hiranya’s court corresponds to the attendent wearing it in the Barabudur scene.

The emissaries from Kanchipuram apparently took with them a person to play the role of Indra’s elephant Airavata as they looked for a Pallavan pure enough to play the role of Indra. This elephant-head crown or hood may have been the complete insignia \(*chihnamakhilam*\) received by the first Pallava ruler of Kanchipuram in the fourth century when he married into the clan providing Kanchi’s Owner \(*kacchiyon*\). That clan was related to the Cholas of Puhar, and chapter five of the *Chilappatikaram*, which describes the annual new year’s festival for the deva Indra, portrays the Chola king in Puhar as an Indra of men. Apparently, the Pallavas of Kanchipuram inherited an ancient royal Indra cult from the Cholas and continued it through Nandivarman Pallavamalla to the last dynastic ruler at the end of the ninth century.

Interestingly, Alexander of Macedon took this ancient royal cult of Indra and Airavata to courts in West Asia when he returned from the Indus River region in 325 BCE.26 Parthian use of the elephant-head hood or crown appears to be a Western appropriation of this ancient South Asian royal cult very much alive in eighth-century Kanchipuram and found as far east as Java.



### ***The Khatakka or Kataka Clan***

The name for Pallavamalla’s clan appears three times in the inscription, twice in Tamil script as the “clan of Katava’s Ruler” \(*katavesha kula*\) and once in grantha script as the “Khatakka kings of the agricultural lands” \(*khatakka mutarayar* \[*muttaraiyar*\]\). Hiranyavarman’s clan apparently included families ruling in the Kaveri delta in the ancient Chola country and had a keen interest in Pallvamalla’s accession to Kanchipuram’s throne. They were probably the ones who later gave Nandivarman refuge and military assistance and built Nandi’s Town as his subcapital. Perhaps the poet Kalikanri of Mangai was a khatakka mutarayar.

In its grantha letters, *khatava* or *khatakka* corresponds to the Sanskrit *khandava* or *khadava;* the Tamil letters, which omit the aspirate, represent *kha* as *ka*. Khandava in the Krishna story is a forest of sugarplums \(*khandava*\) east of the Yamuna River ruled by Indra.27 “Katava’s Ruler” \(*katava-isha*\) or “Khandava’s Ruler” \(*khandava-isha*\) is Indra. Arjuna and Krishna burned down Khandava with Agni’s aid to establish the Pandava realm named after Indra as Indraprastha \(*BP* 1.15.8\). According to this interpretation, the “clan of Katava’s Ruler” denotes a clan that provides an Indra to rule a forest that has been transformed into an agricultural realm, like the ancient Chola kingdom of the Kaveri River delta. It implies that the ruling Indra recognized Krishna’s sovereignty as a Bhagavata. The “clan of Khatava’s ruler” in this inscription thus denotes Bhagavatas claiming the right to provide Kanchipuram’s Indra of Men. Clans disputing this right must have created the anarchy that led to the search for a ruler from a pure lineage.

Clan differences explain variations in the stories of the dynasty’s origin. Pallavamalla’s descendents said that it originated with the first Pallava born to Ashvatthaman and the apsaras Menaka. Skandasishya’s line said it originated with Skandasishya born to Ashvatthaman and a daughter of a naga. Clan differences also explain the concern for purity reported in the inscription. The “purified” \(*parishuddha*\) status of Pallavamalla’s paternal and maternal clans, noted twice as crucial to his authority to assume the throne, appears to mean that both his father and mother came from “Shudras of true being” \(*satshudra*\) who observed the Bhagavata style of life prescribed by Agama. Ancestors on both sides apparently had received Pancharatra consecrations \(*diksha*\), which transformed their innately impure nature into a “true being” passed on to their descendents through clan intermarriage. They probably followed the custom of cross-cousin marriage followed in Krishna’s own Satvata lineage. Alvar poets recorded their lineages of “true being” in sets of seven generations.28

In this inscription, we may conclude, the Khatakka or Katava clan denotes intermarrying families among Bhagavata Pallavas. As muttarayars in the ancient Chola realm, they provided the first Nandivarman to rule Kanchipuram. They retained their social base in the Kaviri River delta, but through Bhima’s migration extended their reach into the realm ruled in the eighth century by Hiranyavarman. And they claimed the right for their Ruler of Katavas to be consecrated Kanchipuram’s Indra of Men.

Further Pallava divisions are suggested by the inscription’s account of Hiranyavarman summoning his four Malla sons: “Hiranyavarma Maharaja sent for all the clan’s Wrestlers \(*kula-mallar*\) in order to ask who would go.” This statement implies the existence of clan members who were not Wrestlers or Mallas, probably Hiranyavarman’s sons by wives other than his primary queen, who must have been a relative of “true being.” Sets of half-brothers sharing the same father but different mothers were common in ancient India, and a source of rivalry and dissension that chapter nine of the *Laws of Manu* attempts to regulate. Intermarriage and clan memory were carefully nourished to sustain family lines, and family lines competing among the Pallavas of Kanchipuram for power explain the anarchy that led to Pallavamalla’s accession.



### ***The Location of Hiranyavarman’s Court: Cambodia?***

The Barabudur elephant-head hood or crown in Java raises the question of the location of Hiranyavarman’s court. There is little hard evidence with which to answer it, and what there is may be interpreted to refer to a location in southern India or in Thailand. It is possible, however, that it was in Kambujadesa, known now as Cambodia. I would like to argue for this location by drawing on the research of T. N. Subrahmaniam and T. V. Mahalingam.29

This is the argument. Simha began to rule Kanchipuram ca. 535 and had two sons. The elder, Simhavishnu, assumed the imperial throne ca. 560. The younger, Bhima, left Kanchipuram and settled in Kambujadesa to found his own court as a great king \(*maharaja*\), but not as an emperor \(*parameshvara*\). He continued to recognize his elder brother in Kanchipuram as the emperor in whose “shade” he ruled as king, because contact between Kanchipuram and Kambujadesa was well developed. Bhima’s descendents through his chief queen belong to the Malla clan of Pallavas, and they ruled with the aid of Pancharatra agamikas imported from Bhagavata centers in India. By 731, the great king in Bhima’s court was Hiranya, and he had four Malla sons and a senior agamika named Tarandikonda Bhojar guiding him as his acharya.

The evidence for this argument is slight but significant. Someone named Bhima apparently settled a fortified town north of the great lake in Kambujadesa before 600, because an inscription of Ishanavarman \(616–628\) found near Phnom Penh records a kingdom and capital known as Bhimapura \(Bhima’s Fortified Town\). It was one of three kingdoms north of the Great Lake subordinate to Ishanavarman \(Subramaniam 1967: 91\). This timing fits Bhima’s exit from Kanchipuram to found his own court. The name Hiranyavarman was common throughout Kambujadesa, and members of the Bhimapura dynasty shared it; this accounts for the name of Pallavamalla’s father \(Subramaniam 1967: 80–94\). Bhimapura must have existed as a dynastic seat for many generations, because the dynasty of Mahidharapura, which ruled Kambujadesa from 1080, appears to have been related to it.

Near the time Bhima left Kanchipuram, royal courts in Kambujadesa were patronizing both the Pancharatra and the Shaiva Agamas. Inscriptions from pre-Angkor Cambodia \(635–685\) record the presence of the Pancharatra Agama and the Pashupata Agama, whose influence continued \(Coedes 1968: 73\). An inscription dated 1052 reports that in 802, when Jayavarman II returned to Kambujadesa after a period of exile in Java, he introduced the Vamachara rites of the Shaiva Agama to enable him to establish himself as emperor independent of Java \(Dyczkowski 1988: 36\). By 877 the Pancharatras, Bhagavatas, and Sattvatas possessed official residences in the new capital of Angkor, along with the Shaivas, Pashupatas, Tapasvins, and Buddhists.30 Finally, in the twelfth century, Suryavarman II \(1112–ca. 1152\) constructed his massive Vishnu-house known today as Angkor Wat \(Coomaraswamy 1965: 191–195\). The Pancharatra Agama may have guided him, because like Nandivarman’s Vishnu-house, Ankor Wat faces westward, has three levels, and possesses elaborate depictions of Bhagavata lore. The similarities in mandala and design of these two imperial Vishnu-houses remain to be explored.

This brings us to the interpretation of the inscription’s use of the word *gahana:* “Starting from there \[at Hiranyavarman’s court\] he came along the way, leaving behind many mountains, rivers, forests, and gahana.” In the *Bhagavata Purana’s* account of Gajendra’s prayer to Hari, *gahana* as “depth” describes the dark and deep water of dissolution \(*BP* 8.3.5\). Mahalingam similarly interprets it to mean watery depths in his translation of the inscription. The location of Bhima’s court across the ocean gahana since the end of the sixth century would explain why Hiranya did not did not recognize the elephant-head insignia held by the attending “Airavata.” Tarandikonda Bhojar recognized it, however, because such ritual details were his responsibility as senior agamika, and because his acharya lineage had been refreshed by generations of Pancharatra agamikas from Bhagavata centers in southern India. When they crossed the gahana they brought accurate and updated knowledge of royal liturgies.



### ***The Last Three Labels of the Inscription***

The final three labels on the prakara at Kanchipuram are badly damaged, but record Pallavamalla’s elevation as Bhagavata emperor and allude to his subsequent struggle with Vikramaditya II. The eleventh label identifies Nandivarman as Perumanatikal. Mahalingam translates this title as “His majesty the king” and notes that it suggests an enhancement of his status after his coronation. Both Minakshi and Mahalingam also understand this inscription to record an invasion of Kanchipuram by Vikramaditya II.

The royal title Perumanatikal derives from the Bhagavata consecration \(*diksha*\) Nandivarman began at the temple of the Eight-Armed Lord \(*ashtabhujasvamin*\) at Attiyur outside Kanchipuram’s wall and moat, and completed at the temple of the Island’s Lord \(*ranganatha*\) on Sri Rangam island in the Kaveri River. This two-part ceremony occurred years after the unction described in the tenth label and illustrated by its panel. As noted earlier, *perumanatikal* means “Great Being’s Venerable Slave” and as an equivalent to “Bhagavan’s Supreme Slave” \(*paramabhagavata*\) denotes the king as the consecrated refugee committed to serving his acharya. Shortly after Nandivarman’s diksha, Vikramaditya II again invaded Kanchipuram through his son Kirtivarman, and Nandivarman took refuge in a fort until Kirtivarman left for Vatapi, the Chalukya capital. The eleventh label thus records both Nandivarman’s status as the “venerable slave of the Bhagavan” derived from his diksha in 745–746 and his return to Kanchipuram after the army of Vikramaditya II had left.

The designers of the sculpted panels, however, did not depict either his consecration as Great Being’s Venerable Slave or his subsequent brief exile. In the case of his consecration, it was a secret rite and would not have been depicted, in contrast to his public unction as an Indra of Men, which they did depict. In the case of his exile, Narada’s rhetorical question to Yudhishthira provided the designers with a guide: “Do people know, king, those of your deeds that are done or mostly done, but not those that failed, hero?” \(van Buitenen 2: 40; *Mahabharata* 2.5.20ff.\). The temple’s designers followed Narada’s implied instruction and did not depict Nandivarman’s failures for his subjects. But his twelve to fourteen years of exile approximate the years Yudhisthira, his brothers, and their wife Draupadi were in exile. Within the esoteric context of the middle-floor sanctum in this Vishnu-house, the designers did record Nandivarman’s exile through the figure of Yudhishthira at his consecration \(*rajasuya*\) after the Great War. We shall discuss that panel in chapter 9.



## **Nandivarman Depicted as Bhagavata Emperor Enthroned**

Let us now turn to the depiction of Nandivarman Pallavamalla enthroned as Bhagavata emperor or Perumanatikal. No inscribed inscriptions identify these panels, which comprise the bottom register on the southern half of the west wall. Our interpretation will therefore depend on the inscription discussed above, on Kalikanri’s poem about the temple found in chapter 3, and on the prashasti poems recording grants he and others made. A sketch from Alexander Rea’s *Pallava Architecture* illustrates the sequence, although not always accurately; it omits some details and exaggerates others \(Figure 4.4\). The movement of animals on the upper and lower registers indicates that the lower sequence is to be read from north to south, from the viewer’s right to left.31




FIGURE 4.4. Nandivarman enthroned as the sovereign of Pallavas. From Rea 1909.


We shall begin with the large central panel in the lower division, illustrated here by Figure 4.5. The panel consists of six distinct but related elements. Reading from the viewer’s right to left, the first element is a female figure who stands at the extreme right, facing forward, her right hand in what appears to be the “fear-not” gesture \(*abhayamudra*\). To her right is the second element, Nandivarman sitting on a throne, his right leg pendent, with his queen to his right. A royal umbrella emerges from behind his right shoulder. His right hand points toward the south, leading the viewer’s eye to the third element.




FIGURE 4.5. Nandivarman enthroned with people and ritual objects protecting his rule. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


That third element is enclosed under a large umbrella supported by a central pole, probably the Indra umbrella \(*karivai*\) referred to in label ten. Its edge is decorated with seven shapes resembling a U or V. Under the umbrella on the north side of the pole \(to the viewer’s right\), and at a level below the queen, sits a man holding a large sword in his right hand. This is Nandivarman’s general, Udayachandra, whose sword cut off the head of the rival claimant and won the realm for his king, as recorded in his grant to 108 Brahmins of 752–753 \(*SII* 2: 361–374; *IA* 8: 273–284\). Under the other side of the umbrella stands a man with his hair knotted at the back gesturing with his left hand toward the north. His left arm extends behind a tall slender rod that appears to be fixed upright in a stand with a broken projection at its top. This is probably the khatvanga staff noted in the tenth label. A small male figure sits cross-legged directly below the standing male’s right side and to the right of the khatvanga. He sits at a lower level and holds a mudra gesture in his left hand. He may be a Shaiva priest connected to the rites of the khatvanga and to the general, Udayachandra. The ill-defined objects in front of the khatvanga and to the seated male’s left may be the conch “with the voice of the sea” of the tenth label, and the drum with the “bitter mouth” added to the conch and khatvanga in stanza nine of Kalikanri’s poem.

The gesture of the male standing to the south complements the gesture of the emperor sitting to the north, and these gestures draw the viewer’s attention to Udayachandra, seated between them and holding the sword upon which Nandivarman’s rule is based. The umbrella thus encloses the three men, the sword, the conch and drum, and the khatvanga within its shade. Rea’s sketch misleadingly leaves out the umbrella’s pole, includes the queen under its shade, and shortens the sword.

The fourth element of the central panel stands immediately south of the umbrella. It is an elaborate mandapa housing the figure of a seated Brahmin, whose sacred thread is visible \(Figure 4.6\). He is Nandivarman’s acharya. He had consecrated Nandivarman to the status of Great Being’s Venerable Slave and, as required of sadhakas, was the object of his devotion, as illustrated by this mandapa \(*SS* 21; Smith 1975: 530–531\). He was to be regarded as a father and mother greater than the sadaka’s biological parents, a point the *Laws of Manu* makes with regard to a Brahmin, but also required of a “purified” Shudra consecrated by Agama. According to Wendy Doniger’s translation,




FIGURE 4.6. Acharya enthroned. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


\(The teacher \[*acharya*\]\) who fills \(the pupil’s\) two ears with the Veda not in vain is to be known as his mother and his father, and he must not act with malice against him. The teacher \[*acharya*\] is more important than ten instructors \[*upadhyaya*\], and the father more than a hundred teachers \[*acharya*\], but the mother more than a thousand fathers. Between the one who gives him birth and the one who gives him the Veda, the one who gives the Veda is the more important father; for a priest’s \[*brahmana*\] birth through the Veda is everlasting, both here on earth and after death. That his mother and father produced him through mutual desire \[*kaman*\] and he was born in the womb, he should regard as his mere coming into existence. But the birth that the teacher \[*acharya*\] who has crossed to the far shore of the Veda produces for him through the verse to the sun-god \[*savitri*\], in accordance with the rules, is real, free from old age and free from death. \(*Manu* 2.144–148, Doniger 1991\)

Nandivarman’s acharya may have been Jyesthapada Somayajin, to whom he gave a village in 753–754 at the request of his grandson serving in the court as the official called the *Brahma-sri-raja* in Sanskrit and the *Brahma-yuva-raja* in Tamil.32 Jyesthapada Somayajin resided at Puni \(now located in Kanchipuram Taluk\), belonged to the Bharadvaja gotra, followed the *Chandogyasutra*, and was described as “poor in faults \(*doshadaridra*\) but distinguished in appearance \(*veshavishishta*\)” \(*SS* 2: 351, lines 93–96\). He would have guided the architect in designing the vimana according to the Pancharatra Agama as indicated by the adjacent model, which is the fifth element \(seen to the left in Figure 1.1\) The vimana model stands directly north of the sixth element, an elephant walking southward with two riders, one of whom holds an object above his head with his two hands.33 The elephant leads the viewer to the battle scenes that end the sequence on the wall.

This long central panel depicts Pallavamalla as Nandivarman after his realm had been established through the seven battles that Udayachandra won with his sword, as described in the grant of 752–753. The seven U or V shapes along the edge of the umbrella may represent those battles as repeated symbols of the Pallava bull crest, but usually the Pallava bull was depicted in its full body. More likely they refer to the story in which Krishna conquers seven demonic bulls to win Pinnai as bride, which is the story Kalikanri refers to in the ninth stanza of his poem about the temple. In the *Bhagavata Purana*, Krishna conquers seven demonic bulls to win the princess Satya as bride.34 Satya, which means “true being,” suggests the true being of imperial rule gained when Udayachandra won seven battles as the foundation of his master’s empire. Their position on the umbrella indicates Krishna the Unobstructed as the source of these victories: Rites enabled his brilliant conquering power \(*tejas*\) to pass from the khatvanga placed near the priest in the panel into the sword Udayachandra holds, and with it he had defeated Skandasishya and then the others.

In the Pancharatra Agama, tejas is Shakti in her mode as Victory \(Vijayashakti\), one of her three forms that Alvar poets refer to frequently and that sculptors depicted in Mamallapuram cave-temples in the seventh century \(see Hudson 1982 and 2001\). All three of Shakti’s forms are present in this enthronement scene. Shri or Tirumakal, the Goddess as Majesty, is the first element in the panel, the female figure standing to Nandivarman’s left and holding what appears to be the gesture “fear not.” Bhumi or Manmakal, the Goddess as Earth or Realm, appears as his queen, Reva, sitting to his right. And the anger of Chandika Durga or Aymakal, the Goddess as Victory, is present in the khatvanga staff next to the umbrella pole; it signifies Goddess Kali, who holds the khatvanga when she emerges from Chandika Durga’s forehead.

Let’s now consider this scene in its larger context. The panel preceding it on the reader’s right depicts two figures impaled, one upside down, in the presence of the king \(Figure 4.7\). Goddess Sri Lakshmi or Tirumakal stands to his left, and an unknown figure stands to his right gesturing toward the impaled men. This signifies the administration of righteous punishment \(*danda*\) upon which Nandivarman’s rule was said to be based.35 At the other end, on the reader’s left, the elephant moving southward points the viewer toward the four final panels of the wall, three of which depict warfare. The penultimate panel, however, depicts an iconic Krishna standing stiffly in the midst of battle; the dynamism of the figures around him emphasize his stone embodiment \(Figure 4.8\). This panel probably portrays the standing black icon that once stood in the top sanctum of the vimana but is now missing; for it was that standing Krishna, as Kalikanri states in stanza nine of his poem, who conquered seven bulls to win Pinnai as his wife.




FIGURE 4.7. Nandivarman at the impaling of two men. Photo by Sathya Seelan.





FIGURE 4.8. The Krishna icon in the midst of battle, southwest prakara wall, lower register. Photo by Hudson, 1993.


Kalikanri also refers to this black stone image in stanza two. He calls it the “firm stone \(*tin chilai*\) that in battle shattered the might of the war bow of the Southern King abounding in chariots.” The Tamil words *tin chilai* mean “hard stone image” \(*shila*\) and “firm bow,” and both are intended.36 Through prayoga rites addressed to Narayana’s wheel Sudarshana, as described for example in *Ahirbudhnya-samhita* 29–30, tejas will enter the weapons of the ruler’s army.37 Accordingly, *tin chilai* both as “hard stone image” and as “firm bow” means that Sudarshana’s prayoga rites allowed the potency \(*shakti*\) embodied by Krishna standing as the black stone in the top-floor sanctum to infuse brilliant conquering power \(*tejas*\) into the emperor’s bow. The means for this infusion was the khatvanga raised during the battle, as Kalikanri states: “One day, in the shape of a lion / With nails sharp as diamond, / The Lord fighting the Valorous One / Clawed his waist and tore it open, / And in beautiful Kacci / Encircled by mansions / He has His place, / The Vishnu-house which the Emperor serves, / The Sovereign who rules the Pallavas / In the shade of his White Umbrella / after he raised / the Spear and Banner / of the *khatvanga /* spine of bones / high above the army” \(*PT* 2.9.6\). These four final panels represent battles Udayachandra won after the seven represented by the seven U or V signs on the umbrella. They account for the defeat of Bhagavati Kali at Kali’s Fort and of the Pandyan’s forces at Mannaikudi.

Four conclusions emerge from this analysis of inscription and of sculpted panels. First, as a Bhagavata emperor, Nandivarman Pallavamalla was more than an Indra of Men. His first unction at the age of about twelve had given him that status through a public ceremony recorded for history by a scene sculpted on the prakara of his imperial Vishnu-house. This royal rite made him the legitimate Pallava ruler of Kanchipuram, at least in the eyes of his supporters. But it was the second unction that gave him the status of chakravartin, and this came at the end of a sequence of rites known as the Vibhava-diksha. This unction was a private rather than public sprinkling \(*abhisheka*\) conducted at the temple of Sri Rangam and not depicted by a sculpted panel, although a damaged inscription refers to it through the title he received. Kalikanri composed two poems to record this consecration for other sadhakas to use in their sadhanas, which we shall bring into our discussion later \(*PT* 2.8 and 5.8\).

Second, the diksha’s first part transformed the Indra of Men into Great Being’s Venerable Slave. Emblems burned into his shoulders at the temple of the Eight-Armed Lord in Attiyur denoted his slave status, the wheel on his right shoulder and the conch on his left.38 The diksha’s second part at Sri Rangam gave him rebirth as Narayana’s son; and the acharya’s “breast milk” then nursed him with the mysteries of the eight-syllable mantra *Om namo narayanaya*. His new status as “son” would have been conveyed by a consecration name of which we have no known record.

Third, since the emperor was now Narayana’s property, he was understood to be an extension of Narayana in the same way as his own general Udayachandra was an extension of him. Just as on the battlefield the general represented his emperor in Kanchipuram, so also the emperor in Kanchipuram represented Narayana in Vaikuntha. Just as one could say that Nandivarman had won the battles fought by Udayachandra, so one could say that Vasudeva Krishna ruled the realm when it was Nandivarman sitting on the throne.

Fourth, in the battles that established the emperor’s firm control over his realm, Narayana’s potency \(*shakti*\), embodied by the Krishna icon standing in the third-floor sanctum infused the general’s sword with brilliant conquering power. This occurred by means of the rites of the khatvanga supervised by the emperor’s acharya but implemented by the priest depicted sitting near it. These rites enabled Goddess Kali in Kanchipuram to overcome Bhagavati Kali in Kali’s Fort. Vasudeva’s Unobstructed formation thus employed tejas on behalf of his imperial slave.

With this introductory background, let us now turn to Parts II and III and the Vishnu-house Nandivarman Pallavamalla built for his Master.



