+++
title = "26 Agamic rule"
+++
The Agamic rule for making a deity 

The agamas like vaikhanasa agama, the pancharatra agama, the tantras, and vishnu dharmottara, are the basic texts which lay down in precise detail the rules regarding the construction of a temple and the installation of murtis therein. In agamas the relative proportions of the idol, the posture of the body, the hands, the weapons to be borne by it, the jewellery to be adorned on it, are all laid down. If there is the slightest defect in execution or even a minute variation from the prescribed rule, that image would be considered unsuitable for consecration or worship and not used. 

According to Sukraniti an image is ideal only when it elevates the lookers on to a higher plane of action and meditation. The eyes of images have particular appeal to the devotee, and as such the eyes should be perfect, be speaking satisfaction, and should neither be directed upwards, downwards or remain closed. According to the Pratima Mana Lakshna, the mouth should be slightly smiling, pleasant and possessed of all good signs.' The mouth should also not be sculptured as one that is 'passionate, impetuous, wrathful, sour, bitter or circular.' Again, according to the Pratima Mana Lakshna the head sculptured like an umbrella brings prosperity. Eternal prosperity is assured by an image with beautiful lines of eyebrows and forehead. The neck has to be conch-like, the body in the posture of a lion, the arms like the trunk of an elephant, and thighs like the plantain tree. A beautiful belly and beautiful feet are symptoms of excellences in any idol. Sukraniti also lays down that images should be beautiful. Considerable freedom was however given in many cases to silpis to carve images while at the same time following the Sastraic principles. They had however to keep in mind that  the characteristic of an image is its power of helping forward contemplation and yoga" while making idols and images. 

The agama Marichi Samhita broadly defines the Vishnu image into three types: Sthanaka (standing), Asana (sitting), and Sayana (lying) poses. Each of this is again divided into four classes depending on the physical and other attitudes of the Lord. These are Yoga, Bhoga, Vira and Abhicharika. The environment and purpose for which a murti is installed, decide the kind of idol which should be used. If for example the devotee prefers to follow the yoga marga, a yoga murti would be selected. Such a murti should be installed outside a village, or in the midst of forests, on mountain and hill tops, or at the confluence of rivers and on river banks. It should not be constructed in the heart of a town or village, as such a murti would bring about destruction of the place. A Bhoga Murti should invariably be installed in the heart of a town or village. A Vira Murti should be on the outskirts of a village. An Abhicharika Murti would be installed in forests, mountains, fortresses, at the outer limits of a Rashtra and facing the enemy country. The Tirumala temple is on a hill and in the midst of forests. It does not appear that at any time there was a fortress, or a village there. It might perhaps have been politically the boundary line between one country and another. The kind of image chosen would therefore be either Yoga or Abhicharika, and not Vira. Bhoga would be out of consideration. 

The features of the Murti for each situation and type are also prescribed in the Agamas. There are three grades of temples depending on the comple- mentary deities. These are called Utthama, Madhyama and Adhama (best, middling and low type). In the Utthama temple the Murti would be associated with the complimentary deities, Brahma, Sankara, Markandeya, Bhrigu, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumara etc. etc. In the Madhyama type Marken- deya etc., would be omitted but Brahma and Siva retained. In the lowest type Brahma and Siva also would be omitted, leaving the Murti to stand alone. The above rule governs the installation of Yoga, Bhoga and Vira Murtis alike. In the case of an Abhicharika Murti, however, there is only one type, the Adhama type and therefore, the principal Murti alone would be installed. Further, in the former types the temple would have Vimanams and the consecration would be on an auspicious day in Sthira Lagna (at any rate not in a chara lagna). For the Abhicharika Murti the installation should be at an inauspicious moment and in Chara Lagna. The temple should not have a Vimanam. 

