+++
title = "27 General features"
+++
General features of an idol of Vishnu 

Vishnu images usually have four arms, the ayudhas or weapons held in the hands usually being the Chakra, Sankha or conch, the Bow and arrows and the Gada or club. The other weapons of Vishnu include the khetaka or the shield, the katari or the sword, the parasu or the battle-axe, hala or the plough, and sometimes the whip (for Gopi-Krishna) images. The hands are usually in the abhaya, varada or katyavalambita poses. It is however relevant to note here that the Yogasastra recognises twenty five kinds of mudras in images. The Abhaya pose is the one in which the Lord holds his hand aloft, with the right palm facing the devotee with all the fingers of the hand pointing upwards. This is a pose in which the Lord assures his protection to the devotee-relieving him from fear i.e., Bhaya. The Varada hasta is the pose in which the Lord holds his hand with the palm facing the devotee with all the fingers of the hand pointing downwards. This pose signifies that the Lord is a giver of boons. According to the Maya- sastram however, "when the tip of the thumb is placed at the end of the breast, it is the attitude of abhaya or protection of God. If the hand is on the waist, it is said to be the attitude of giving vara or boon." The Katyavalambita hasta pose is the one in which the Lord keeps his hand (left hand) on the kati or waist. This is a pose that indicates that the Lord's protection and grace is available to those worshipping him with constant devotion. According to another interpretation, it indicates that Samsara is knee-deep only to those devoted to the Lord's feet. Vishnu images are shown to carry several ornaments such as the Padma or the lotus, Kirita or the crown, Makara Kundalas or crocodile ear ornaments, Keyura or armlets, Kankanas or wristlets, Udara- bandhas or ornaments around the waist, Katibandhas or ornaments around the waist and the hips, the sacred thread etc. There is usually a mole on the right chest called the Srivatsa, and a garland reaching up to the knees called the Vaijayantimala. Sri Kaustubam is a gemstudded jewel on the chest which is sacred to Lakshmi. The consort of the Lord is usually carved or exhibited near the Srivatsa and the Sri Kousthubam. 

The Yoga murtis are depicted generally in the yoga mudra, and in the sthanaka pose. The Lord has four arms with Sankha and Chakra in the upper two hands. The other two hands are in the abhaya and katyavalambita poses. Yoga sitting idol is described in the Gherandasamhita as follows:- 

“While squatting, turn the feet upwards; place them on the knees; then place the hands on the asana with the palm turned upwards; inspire and fix the gaze on the tip of the nose." 

A fine example of this pose is Sri Badrinarayana of Badrinath. The Sayana or reclining Yoga murti has only two hands of which the right is placed near the pillow under the head. The typical yogasana sayana murti is the image of Sri Ranganatha of Srirangam in South India. The Bhoga image of Lord Vishnu also has four arms with the Sankha and Chakra in the sthanaka pose. The hands are usually in the Abhaya, Varada, or Katyavalambita poses. As a Sayana murti the Bhoga form is sculptured as seated in the sukhasana, in which the right leg hangs down and the left leg is folded to touch the right thigh. The reclining Bhoga murti has two or four arms and a well built body. In this type Laxmi is depicted as seated near the shoulder of the Lord; Brahma near the naval of the main idol; and Bhudevi near the feet of the Lord. 

The Vira type of Vishnu image in the sthanaka pose is practically similar to that of the sthanaka yoga murti except that he stands alone or is surrounded by the sun, the moon, Brahma and Siva. The sitting Vira murti is seated on a simhasana, with the left leg bent and the right leg extended in front. The reclining Vira murti has four arms of which one is used as a pillow and the other holding the Chakra with one of the left hands stretched out parallel to the reclining murti and the second left hand holding the Sankha. 

The Abhicharika variety is usually dark complexioned and the sculpture shows the angry pose to exhibit ugra rasa. The sthanaka image has two or four arms; the seated image has either two or four arms and is on an unornamented plain pedestal; the reclining idol is shown lying on the floor with two or four arms. The consorts of the Lord are not in attendance in this type of image, but the rishis and the demons Madhu and Kaitaba are shown in the act of supplication. 

Thus we have in the agamas, three types, the sthanaka, asana and sayana form of the idol, each of which is divided into four classes namely Yoga, Bhoga, Vira and Abhicharika, each of which has also three grades of temples like Uttama, Madhyama and Adhama. Thus there are in all 36 different types of Vishnu image out of which any particular image has to be specifically identified. 

