+++
title = "281"
+++
Sevā Is Perfect in Itself 
२८१ । तथा ( भा० १० | ५१/५६ ) - 
PADA-SEVA is also described by King Mucukunda: 
न कामयेऽन्यं तव पादसेवनादकिञ्चनप्रार्थ्यतमाद् वरं विभो । आराध्य कस्त्वां ह्यपवर्गदं हरे वृणीत आर्यो वरमात्मबन्धनम् ॥ ८५९ ॥ 
O Lord, O Hari, I do not covet any boon other than service to Your feet, which is the highest benediction aspired for by those who have abandoned all egoism and desire (akiñcanas). For what person of discernment, having worshiped You, the bestower of liberation, would choose as preferable a boon that perpetuates the bondage of the self? (SB 10.51.56)2 
अकिञ्चना मोक्षपर्यन्तकामनारहिताः । तत्र हेतुः - त्वामाराध्य कस्त्वामपवर्गदं सन्तं वृणीत | अपवर्गदतयाविर्भवन्तं समाश्रयेतेत्यर्थः । वरमित्यव्ययमीषत् प्रिये । वरमात्मनो बन्धनमेव वृणीत ॥ 
| 
The word akiñcanaḥ means "those who are devoid of all desire" (kāmanā-rahitāh), including the longing for liberation (moksa). In the form of a question, Mucukunda expresses the reason why such akincanas don't desire even liberation. He asks, "Having worshiped you, who would solicit You merely as the bestower 
1 Sridhara Svami glosses the word akincana here as niskamah, "those who are free 
from desire,” and as nivrtta-abhimānāh, “those who are free from the ego of separate doership." 
2 
na kamaye'nyam tava pada-sevanad akincana-prarthyatamad varam vibho aradhya kas tvam hy apavargadam hare vrnita aryo varam atma-bandhanam 
407III The Practice of Bhakti 
of liberation?" In other words, who would take shelter of Bhagavän with the view that His appearance is only for the sake of awarding liberation? The word varam, "preferable," [in the final quarter of the verse] is an indeclinable adverb, and it is used here in reference to any boon that is only slightly agreeable (işat-priye). Mucukunda thus asks, "Who would choose as preferable (varam) a boon that is nothing but bondage for the self?" 
Commentary 
FROM the discussion in the previous anuccheda, one should not think that service (seva) is only a means to purify the heart, leading to remembrance. Service in itself is a complete act of devotion and does not depend on any other practice. Service indeed is the natural outcome of love. Therefore, perfected devotees pray for service. This is the essence of Mucukunda's prayer. Of course, service can also be performed with a motive. This, however, is despised by genuine devotees, or akincana-bhaktas. 
The word akincana literally means "having nothing at all." Here, however, it refers to a devotee who has abandoned all sense of possessiveness, or separate ego, and who desires nothing but service to Bhagavan. Truly speaking, all beings in the material world are akincanas, or "owning nothing," because everything belongs to Bhagavan. We are born naked, having no possessions, and we die, leaving everything behind. We did not bring any possessions with us, not even our clothing, and we do not carry anything with us at the time of death. Between birth and death, however, we harbor the false idea of independent ownership. 
The word varam has various meanings. Its most common usage is as a noun, meaning, "a boon received from a deity." In the verse under discussion (SB 10.51.56), the first instance of the word varam has this meaning. As an adjective, varam means "best" or "most 
408 
281 Seva Is Perfect in Itself 
excellent." But as an indeclinable adverb, it means "slightly agreeable" (manak-priye, Amara-kosa 3.3.173) Śrī Jiva takes the second occurrence of varam in the verse as an indeclinable and thus implies that any boon other than selfless seva to Bhagavan is not desirable for a devotee. 
3 devad vrte varaḥ śresthe trisu klibam manak-priye 
409 
