+++
title = "287"
+++
Worship of Kṛṣṇa Is Worship of All 
२८७ । “जीवराशिभिराकीर्णः " (भा० ७ । १४ । ३६) इत्यादि । 
BHAGAVAN ACYUTA is the root of the vast tree of this cosmos, which is pervaded by multitudes of living beings. Thus, by worshiping Him, all beings as well as one's own self become satiated. (SB 7.14.36)1 
सर्वेषाम् जीवानामात्मनश्च तर्पणरूपा सैव भवतीत्यर्थः ॥ 
Narada's statement to the king means that the worship of Bhagavän Krsna is itself an offering of oblations (tarpanam) to all living beings and to oneself (ätmanam) also. 
1 
Commentary 
OVER the next eight anucchedas beginning with this one, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmi undertakes to establish that the deity of Bhagavan is the supreme object of charity and honor (patra). To do so, he cites the final seven verses from chapter 14 of the Seventh Canto (SB 7.14.3642) and the first two verses from the following chapter (SB 7.15.1-2). 
In the first of these verses, Narada points out that just as by watering the root of a tree, the whole tree becomes nourished, so too by pleasing Krsna through our actions, everyone becomes 
jiva-rasibhir akirna anda-kosanghripo mahan tan-mulatvad acyutejyä sarva-jivātma-tarpanam 
480 
287 Worship of Krsna Is Worship of All 
pleased, including one's own self. Krsna is comparable to the original object or prototype (bimba), and the living beings are compared to His reflections (pratibimba). If we wish to beautify a reflected image, we need to decorate the original object and not its reflection. 
481 
