+++
title = "291"
+++
Worship of the Deity Should Be Performed without Malice for Other Beings 
२९१ । “ततोऽर्चायाम् ” ( भा० ७ । १४ ।४०) इत्यादि । 
1 
THEREAFTER, some people worshiped Bhagavan Hari in the form of the deity with great faith and suitable paraphernalia. But even if the deity is thus worshiped, it does not award the fruit to those who bear malice toward other human beings. (SB 7.14.40)1 
तत एवं प्रभावात् । केचिदित्यधिष्ठानवैशिष्ट्येन पूर्वतोऽप्युत्तमसाधनतत्परा इत्यर्थः । 
The word tataḥ, "thereafter," implies that from that point on, the deity of Hari was worshiped because It possesses such power [to counter disrespect and instill honor for all beings]. The word kecit, "some people," refers to those who were resolutely fixed in the highest form of sadhana, because the deity, as a seat of worship (adhisthana), was distinguished as superior to the other seats mentioned earlier. 
नन्ववज्ञावद् द्वेषेऽपि सिद्धिः स्यात् ? इत्याशङ्क्यातिप्रसङ्गवारणेच्छ्या प्रस्तुतपुरुषरूपाधिष्ठानादररक्षेच्छया च तं वारयति “उपास्तापि" इति ॥ 
A doubt may be raised in this regard. Can worship of the deity yield success even for those who bear malice toward others, 
1 
tato'rcayam harim kecit samsraddhaya saparyaya 
upāsata upasṭāpi narthada purusa-dvisām 
490 
291 Worship of the Deity Should Be Performed without Malice for Other Beings 
just as it does for those who are prone to disrespect? Anticipating this argument, Śri Narada, with the intent to prevent the defect of over-extending the range of application of his previous statement (atiprasanga)2 [SB 7.14.39] and wanting to ensure that respect be maintained for human beings in general as existential seats (adhisthana) of Bhagavan's abidance, dismisses any such possibility by stating that worship of the deity cannot bear fruit for those who are inimical toward other living beings. 
Commentary 
IN THE PREVIOUS verse (SB 7.14.39), it was mentioned that the sages established the worship of the deity, having observed the attitude of disrespect in human beings. From this, it might be assumed that deity worship should be effective even for those who bear malice toward other human beings. To refute this idea, Sri Narada makes it clear in his next statement (SB 7.14.40) that such is not the case, because hatred is far more grievous than disrespect. A person full of hatred for other beings is not purified by deity worship. The reason for this is that God is present in all beings and not only in the deity form. One who hates others also hates God, who is present within them. This is an unforgivable offense. Although disrespecting others is also disrespect to God, yet because the sages instituted deity worship specifically to counter this defect, the deity tolerates the attitude of disrespect and purifies the worshiper. 
2 
A doubt may be raised in this regard. Bhagavan Kapila says: 
I am ever existent as the Supreme Immanent Self in all living entities. If a mortal being disregards any one of them (tam) and hence Me (mam), yet worships My deity form, he makes a mockery of such worship. (SB 3.29.21)3 
Atiprasanga is another word for the defect called ativyapti, the over-application of a rule or definition. 
3 aham sarvesu bhutesu bhutatmavasthitah sadah 
tam avajñāya mam martyah kurute'rca-vidambanam 
491 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
And further: 
O sinless one (Devahuti), I am certainly not pleased with a person who disrespects other living beings, even if he worships Me in the deity form by enacting elaborate rituals conducted with all manner of articles. (SB 3.29.24)4 
In these verses, Kapila Deva emphasizes that one who worships the deity while disregarding other living beings is not pleasing to Him. Above, however, it is said that one who worships the deity while disrespecting others can be purified, but not one who bears malice. The solution to this apparent contradiction is that the disrespect referred to by Kapila is inclusive of hatred. This is understood from His statement in the same group of verses: "A person who bears hostility toward Me situated in all other bodies... can never attain the state of utter mental tranquility" (dviṣataḥ parakaye mām ... na manaḥ santim rcchati, SB 3.29.23). Alternatively, the meaning of the two verses cited above (SB 3.29.21 and 24) is not that the disrespectful worshiper is denied all benefit, but rather that he attains it belatedly. Śrī Kapila confirms this interpretation in His 
own words: 
As long as one does not directly perceive Me within his heart as the Interior Regulator (Iśvara) present within all living beings, he should worship Me in the deity form while carrying out his prescribed duties. (SB 3.29.25) 
This topic is explained by Śri Jiva Gosvāmī in his comment on SB 3.29.21 (see Anuccheda 106). 
aham uccavacair dravyaih kriyayotpannayanaghe naiva tuşye'rcito'rcayam bhuta-gramavamaninah 5 arcadav arcayet tavad isvaram mam sva-karma-kṛt yavan na veda sva-hrdi sarva-bhuteşv avasthitam 
492 
