+++
title = "314"
+++
Krsna 
Sisupala's Envy of Kṛṣṇa Śiśupāla's 
३१४ | एषः (भा० ७|१|१७) - 
[YUDHISTHIRA CONTINUES with the same line of reasoning] in 
his next statement: 
दमघोषसुतः पाप आरभ्य कलभाषणात् । 
सम्प्रत्यमर्षी गोविन्दे दन्तवक्रश्च दुर्मतिः ।। १०१५ ।। 
The sinful son of Damaghosa [Sisupala] was envious of Govinda [Śri Krsna] from the time he first began to speak in broken tones up until now. The same is also true of the fool Dantavakra. (SB 7.1.17)1 
स्पष्टम् ॥ 
The meaning of this verse is clear. 
Commentary 
SISUPALA HAD A natural taste for abusing Kṛṣṇa that was not achieved through any practice. After hearing the story of Sisupala's liberation, people sometimes think that there is no need of performing bhakti and that they can attain liberation by abusing God in the same manner as Sisupala. This is a gross misunderstanding. 
damaghosa-sutah papa ärabhya kala-bhāṣaṇāt 
sampraty amarsi govinde dantavakras ca durmatiḥ 
644 
314 Sisupala's Envy of Krsna 
Such people will go to hell like Veņa, because their abuse of Krsna is not born of a natural hatred or negative räga. 
Earlier it was said that the mind becomes absorbed in an object for which it has a natural taste. The mind also becomes obsessed with a person whom one hates. The liberation of Sisupala was not because he was abusive toward Krsna, but because his mind was naturally absorbed in Krsna, albeit in a negative way. Common people, such as Vena, do not have this type of natural antipathy for Krsna, and thus their minds cannot be fully absorbed in Him in the manner exhibited by Sisupala. Their involvement in abusive behavior is like the devotion executed by a neophyte vaidhabhakta, which does not have the same degree of absorption due to an absence of taste, ruci. Their minds quickly turn to some other object of interest. 
645 
