+++
title = "337"
+++
Kṛṣṇa's Supreme Graciousness 
३३७ । तस्य सर्वावतारावतारिष्वप्रकटितं परमशुभस्वभावत्वं च स्मृत्याह ( भा० 312123)- 
REMEMBERING THE SUPREMELY auspicious nature (paramasubha-svabhava) of Bhagavan Kṛṣṇa, which was never manifest in any other avatara or avatāri, Uddhava spoke the following words: 
1 
अहो बकी यं स्तन कालकूटं जिघांसयापाययदप्यसाध्वी । 
लेभे गतिं धात्र्युचितां ततोऽन्यं कं वा दयालुं शरणं व्रजेम ॥ १०७० ॥ 
How astonishing indeed! Although the sinister demoness Pūtană, the sister of the demon Baka, applied deadly poison to her breast and suckled Śrī Kṛṣṇa with the intent to kill Him, she was granted the position of a nursemaid (dhātrī). Consequently, who else could be more merciful than Him, whom we should approach for shelter? (SB 3.2.23)2 
धात्र्या या उचिता गतिस्तामेव ॥ स ( श्रीमदुद्भवः) एव || 
Kṛṣṇa awarded Putana the destination appropriate for a nursemaid (dhātrī). 
The word avatari here refers to any form of Bhagavan who is the source of other avataras, such as Bhagavan Nārāyaṇa. 
2 aho baki yam stana-kalakutam jighamsayapayayad apy asādhvi 
lebhe gatim dhatry ucitam tato'nyam kam va dayālum saranam vrajema 
763 
III The Practice of Bhakti 
Commentary 
UDDHAVA was a disciple of Brhaspati, the guru of the devas. He was one of the most learned among the Yadavas. Even Śrī Kṛṣṇa used to consult with him. His statement is thus authoritative and not made out of mere sentiment. Uddhava spoke this verse to Vidura when they met in Vṛndavana on the bank of the Yamuna. Just prior to this, Krsna had departed the earth for His own abode and had ordered Uddhava to go to Badarīkāśrama. Vidura was not aware of Krsna's departure at that time. When he inquired about Him from Uddhava, the latter began recollecting Kṛṣṇa's līlās and His wonderful qualities. 
In this verse (SB 3.2.23), Uddhava marvels at Krsna's extraordinary graciousness. Putana was sent by Kamsa to kill Kṛṣṇa. She assumed the form of a cowherd woman and smeared her breast with the deadliest poison. She gave her breast to Krsna to suckle but was killed by Him instead. In spite of her sinister intention, Krsna awarded her the position of a nursemaid (dhātrī), which is almost akin to that of a mother. Such grace has never been bestowed by any other avatara or avatarī on anyone. Although Pūtana was not a devotee, did not perform any spiritual practice, and was motivated by a malicious intent, she was awarded a position that the greatest of jñānis and yogis are unable to attain. For this reason, Uddhava marvels while recollecting this incident. 
It is believed that this is one of the verses that captivated the mind of Sukadeva, who was fully absorbed in Brahman. On hearing it, he gave up his fixity in Brahman and studied Bhagavata Purāṇa from his father. Even Brahma refers to the same incident in his prayers to Krsna (SB 10.14.35) and marvels at Krsna's grace. 
764 
