+++
title = "11 The Vimana Panels on the Western Side"

+++





To enter inside the prakara wall enclosing the Vishnu-house, visitors must first pass through a dark hall \(*mandapa*\) without windows and walk eastward toward sunlight shining through the doorway ahead. When they then pass through that doorway, the entire western face of the porch comes into view, blazing in sunlight. Symbolically, they have just emerged from the nighttime darkness of the Kali Yuga into the brillant light of God’s body.

Directly in front of them, a small bridge leads across the drainage “moat” to the doorway of the porch. Through that porch is the bottom-floor sanctum where Vasudeva sits facing west. On either side of the porch’s doorway stand guardians. Each guardian is flanked by a lion standing on its hind legs, and on each side of those standing lions is a Kalki panel. After each Kalki panel, a sculpted panel terminates the porch wall at its north and south corners.

This chapter begins the discussion of the sculpted program of the vimana on the bottom floor. All four sides of the vimana mandala contain six panels each. The two corner panels of each side define the content of the four panels they bracket; the vyuha formation gazing from the sanctum hidden inside through the side’s central opening determines this content. We shall discuss each side, beginning with the two corner panels and then the four panels they frame. Each panel of a side will be numbered 1–6, beginning to the viewer’s right. Since visitors encounter the western side immediately upon entering through the prakara gateway, we shall begin with it and proceed clockwise. Because this is a mandala, the porch will be thought of as flush with the mandala’s western side \(Figure 11.1\). The four panels on the face of the porch are to be thought of as bracketed by the corner panels in a continuous sequence of six panels, as shown in Figure 11.2, which depicts the mandala with the porch extended on the western side. The panels on the northern and southern sides of the porch will be discussed at the end of this chapter.




FIGURE 11.1. Bottom-floor vimana with collapsed porch. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.





FIGURE 11.2. Bottom floor: Porch and vimana sculpted panels. Drawing by Case and Sandgren.




## ******The Corner Panels of the Vimana’s Western Side**

### ***Panel W1: The Unbounded Tortoise* \(*Akupara*\)**

THE STORY. In the region called Hiranmayavarsha \(Made of Gold\), Aryama worships the Bhagavan as the Tortoise \(Kurma\). Its representation here is not immediately evident because the figure of the Bhagavan does not resemble a tortoise. But according to the story \(*BP* 5.18.29–33\), in the region Made of Gold, the leader of the ancestors \(*pitri*\) named Aryama worships Tortoise. Shuka made that clear when he described the region to Parikshit \(*BP* 5.18.29\). Yet in his prayer, Aryama does not address him as Tortoise \(Kurma\), but as Akupara, which means the “Unbounded.” Aryama begins his prayer this way: “Veneration to the Bhagavan, to the Unbounded distinguished by all qualities of pure being, whose place has never been traced, beyond all regions, present everywhere, containing everything, whose form is this world of multiple forms projected by maya” \(*BP* 5.18.31\). Aryama then praises him as the manifest world of moving and unmoving multiplicity, which sages learned in metaphysical calculation \(*samkhya*\), have divided into twenty-four categories. The Unbounded, he concludes, is the true meaning of Samkhya.

The reason the Unbounded took on the bounded form of a tortoise is explained in the story of the Churning of the Milk Ocean during the sixth manvantara. As we recall from chapter 7, when devas and asuras were using the golden mountain Mandara as churning paddle and the snake Vasuki as churning rope, they could not hold up Mandara because of its weight. Vishnu therefore assumed the form of a gigantic tortoise, entered the ocean, and held the mountain up on its back like an island in the sea. Tortoise felt the twirling of the Mandara mountain as pleasant back-scratching.

During the churning, Tortoise breathed in and out, creating the steady inhalation and exhalation of Brahma’s body. Soothed by Mandara’s scratching, he gradually went to sleep and is still there in the bottom of the waters. We who are limited by ignorance see his regular breathing in the ocean’s high and low tides \(*BP* 12.13.2\). As Tortoise fell asleep, various items arose from the churning, including the death-giving kalakuta poison, which Rudra-Shiva keeps in his throat, and the life-giving amrita, which Dhanvantari brought up in a pot and devas and asuras fought over. As depicted on the north side of middle floor \(Panel 7\), an asura stole the pot. Mohini later seduced the asuras into giving her the amrita and distributed it to the devas \(*BP* 8.7.8–12\), as portrayed on this same southwest corner of the vimana, but facing south \(Panel S6\).

THE PANEL. The tall and crowned Akupara the Unbounded stands off-center to the north on a short pedestal \(Figure 11.3\). He faces forward but turns his body slightly southward so that worshipers on the circumambulation path may see him directly. He has the shape of a man with two pairs of arms, the wheel and conch held in the back, as usual. His front right hand rests on his hip. He raises his front left arm to form a mudra at the level of his shoulder, but damage has made it indecipherable; perhaps it was the “Mudra of the Tortoise” \(*kurmamudra*\), which the figure above to his left forms with his right hand.




FIGURE 11.3. Panel W1: Akupara, the Unbounded Tortoise. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


To Akupara’s left stands the shorter Aryama, the overlord of pitris or ancestors, the top of whose crown or matted hair reaches almost to the wrist of the Bhagavan’s left hand. Aryama faces forward but turns slightly toward the Bhagavan as he gazes up, forming the anjalimudra of veneration with his two hands. Three persons of this region appear at the top of the panel aligned with the Bhagavan’s crowned head. The middle figure marks the panel’s central axis running down the left side of the Bhagavan’s head to the little toe of his left foot; this male raises his right arm and appears to open his hand with the palm facing forward at the level of his chin. The male north of him \(partially hidden behind the panel frame and the wheel\) faces the Bhagavan and gazes down on him as he raises his left hand to touch his face or ear; his right arm may have broken off. The more fully exposed figure to the south is directly above Aryama. He faces forward, turns toward the Bhagavan, appears to rest his left hand on his hip, and with his right hand at his breast forms the kurmamudra: a closed fist with the thumb placed inside the curled fingers turned toward the viewer \(*PS* 1974: no. 80\).

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. The Bhagavan depicted here does not have the form of a tortoise, but its placement makes that identity clear in two ways. First, in the clockwise direction, it appears right after the Mohini panel. That matches the way Shuka summarized the story of the Milk Ocean churning. Vishnu as the supporter of Mandara, he said, was the basis for the churning, for the emergence of amrita, and for the appearance of Mohini who fed it to the devas \(*BP* 8.12.45–47\). Second, the panel’s southwest location matches the location of the ancestors, whose leader Aryama in the Hiranmayavarsha region worships Tortoise. Many ancestors led by Aryama do not live in that region, however, but in Yama’s purgatorial realm, Naraka. It lies near Yama’s capital southward on the circular mountain range Manasottara \(Beyond the Mind\). Purgatory lies below earth, but above the waters, perhaps to the southwest. In order to bring blessings to their descendents when they are brought for punishment, the ancestors dwelling there meditate on the Bhagavan intensely. Yama is their king \(*pitriraja*\), and Aryama is their overlord \(*pitriganadhipati*\) \(*BP* 5.18.26 and 5.26.4–6\).

Since Aryama prays to the Unbounded and does not mention his tortoise form, designers of the Vishnu-house did not have to portray an actual tortoise \(although Raghunathan, Tagare, and Tapasyananda all translated *akupara* as “tortoise”\). Such freedom was not possible in the cases of other animal forms, Man-lion and Boar for example, because the prayers addressed to them specifically mention their animal forms and depend on them for their meanings.

Moreover, the bounded form the Unbounded took signifies Yoga, which is the practical application of the samkhya metaphysical system identified by Aryama with Akupura. The five limbs of the tortoise \(four legs and neck\) represent the yogin’s five senses \(seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching\); when withdrawn, they represent the yogin’s withdrawal from their objects, immersed only in the sixth sense, the mind. Krishna told Arjuna that the person immersed in the enstasy of steady insight \(*prajna*\) is a silent sage \(*muni*\) envisioning the Supreme, like a tortoise \(*kurma*\) with limbs drawn inside its shell \(*BG* 2.54–59\). The yogin in samadhi is an unmoving rocklike body of consciousness.

At the same time, Tortoise at the bottom of the waters represents the “root support” \(*muladhara*\) of Brahma’s subtle body of consciousness as he engages in yogic praxis. In the Bhagavata Yoga that Krishna explained to Uddhava \(*BP* 11.14–15\), Tortoise corresponds to that fundamental “wheel” \(*chakra*\), which in the human body is located at the base between the anus and genitalia. The disciplined breathing of the yogin’s pranayama, with its steady movement of inhalation and exhalation, matches Tortoise’s breathing seen by us in the tides of the salt ocean. That ocean, of course, represents restless consciousness filled with “graspers,” which the yogin’s pranayama seeks to pacify, purify, and unify.

In other words, this panel reveals Brahma to be the paradigmatic yogin, who begins his practice during the sixth manvantara of his daytime. We who live in the seventh manvantara live with its results, namely, the products churned up from Brahma’s mantra-infused consciousness represented by the Milk Ocean.

When the yogin performs his sadhana, he appears to be asleep like a tortoise with limbs withdrawn, but according to Yoga theory, he is in fact moving his “wakefulness” \(*bodhi*\) inwardly upward through his subtle body along the sushumna channel of the subtle body that parallels the spine. Depending on the goal sought, it moves through chakras from the “root support” \(*muladhara*\) at the base of the spine to the “suture of Brahma” \(*brahmarandhra*\) at top of the head \(*BP* 11.15.24\).

That upward journey is represented by the ritual implement called khatvanga. The khatvanga depicts a spine topped by one or more skulls. The Goddess Kali holds it when she emerges from Chandika Durga’s forehead \(*DM* 7.5–9 and 15\), and it is important to prayogic rites performed by Bhagavatas, Shaivas, and Buddhists.1 As we know from the tenth label on the prakara inscription that records Pallavamalla’s consecration as “Indra of Men,” the khatvanga was one of several items important to his rule: “After entering the palace, the body of ministers, the men of the great assembly, the men of the two ganas, and the members of the ghatika, all came together to anoint him: With the name Nandivarman, with the karivai umbrella for his chariot, \[the conch\] with the voice of the sea, the khatvanga staff, the bull crest…, and issuing commands under the royal seal of Vitelvituku, they anointed him.”2

According to Kalikanri in his poem about the temple, Nandivarman used the khatvanga as part of his righteous rule.3 The poet correlated its conquering power \(*tejas*\) with that of Man-lion: “One day, in the shape of a lion / With nails sharp as diamond, / The Lord fighting the Valorous One / Clawed his waist and tore it open, / And in beautiful Kacci / Encircled by mansions / He has His place, // The Vishnu-house which the Emperor serves, / The Sovereign who rules the Pallavas / In the shade of his White Umbrella / after he raised / the Spear and Banner / of the khatvanga / spine of bones / high above the army” \(*PT* 2.9.6\). Here the khatvanga signifies the practical or prayogic use of sadhanas sponsored by the emperor for conquest, which is the meaning it has for the Goddess Kali when she emerges from Chandika Durga’s forehead. Significantly, Chandika Durga’s mount is the lion; through the khatvanga, Kalikanri linked her lion to Man-lion. In both cases, the lion—a favored Pallava emblem—signifies the Bhagavan’s power, either as jnana in his Plower formation, or as tejas in his Unobstructed formation.

According to Krishna, during the internal upward journey of “awakenedness,” the yogin may choose to generate up to eighteen supernormal powers \(*siddhi*\) and five subsidiary ones \(*BP* 11.15.3–36\). Some of them—such as the control of others, clairvoyance, entering the bodies of others, physically moving by thought alone, or assured victory—are examples of prayoga, the practical application of mantras through ritual acts. Others—such as the attainment of transcendent joy or the purity of the Lord of White Island—are examples of siddhis that lead to the ultimate purpose of yoga, which is not the generation of miraculous powers but rather the perception of Vasudeva Krishna dwelling within as the Self. He is the source of all siddhis, and of yoga, samkhya, dharma, and of the doctrine of *brahman* \(*brahmavada*\).

The Bhagavatas used the khatvanga to signify that final goal as well as the penultimate prayogic goal of conquest. We learn that from the story in the *Bhagavata Purana* of the king whose name was Khatvanga \(*BP* 9.9.41–9.10.4\). King Khatvanga was progenitor of the Raghu Dynasty into which Hari was born in four portions \(*amsha*\): Rama, Lakshmana, Bharata, and Satrughna, the subjects of the famous *Ramayana* by Valmiki. King Khatvanga was invincible in battle and devas used him to help them defeat asuras. But when he learned that he had only one hour \(*muhurta*\) left to live, King Khatvanga turned all of his yogic skill toward Narayana to attain the supreme *brahman*. That supreme *brahman* is so subtle \(*sukshma*\) that some, like the Buddhists, the story says, see it as empty \(*shunya*\). But King Khatvanga knew it not to be empty \(*ashunya*\), but to be Vasudeva, God in whom all things dwell and who dwells in all things.

Interestingly, the Unbounded as Tortoise at the bottom of the waters in Brahma’s body is analogous to the Plower as the Snake called Endless \(Ananta\). Ananta holds the body of the awakened Brahma on one of his many hoods as Brahma creatively churns out the events of his day. Supporting Brahma from beneath, Endless meets Unbounded at the muladhara chakra at the base of Brahma’s subtle body. Since Bhagavata Yoga employs the wheel or chakra mandala known as Beautiful to See \(Sudarshana\), we may now understand why the *Paushkara-samhita* said that Sudarshana as “support” \(*adhara*\) is to be visualized both as Tortoise and as the endless snake Ananta \(*Paushkara-samhita* 22; Smith 1975: 284\).

Finally, the Unbounded Tortoise at the base of Brahma’s body points toward the ultimate goal of Bhagavata Yoga, which is upward through Brahma’s body to Satyaloka and then out through the top of Brahma’s own suture \(*brahmarandhra*\). That goal is Vaikuntha, and is depicted on the south-facing corner panel of the porch \(Panel SP3\). Vaikuntha, we recall, is the ultimate realm of the supreme *brahman* from which Jaya and Vijaya fell to become Vishnu’s archenemies: Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakasipu, Ravana and Kumbhakarna, and Shishupala and Dantavaktra.

We can now summarize several of the meanings of the panel: First, it represents the Region Made of Gold, the second region northward from Meru on the continent Jambu. Second, placed at the southwest corner of Nirriti’s disintegration, this panel denotes the first period of night. Third, by means of Aryama, the overlord of ancestors, it signifies the realm of Yama, Son of the Sun or Vaivastava, for Yama is Aryama’s king. Yama’s realm lies far to the south between Earth and the dark waters of the underworld Rasa, where Naraka or Purgatory, with its twenty-one degrees of punishment, exists. Pitri ancestors reside there to seek blessings for their gotra lineages by means of supreme and true samadhi \(*BP* 5.26.4–37\). Their overlord Aryama, however, worships Akupara in the region Made of Gold far to the north.

Fourth, Aryama’s prayer to Akupara identifies him as the Tortoise who appears in an ancient story of creation by Prajapati, Master of Progeny, told in the *Shatapatha Brahmana* \(6.1.1.12–15; 6.1.3.1–7; 6.5.1.2–3; 7.5.1.1–11\). Prajapati firsts creates *brahman* as a foundation. By means of Vach, his Speech, he then produces waters, and he inseminates these waters with *brahman*. This produces an egg or embryo \(*anda*\). Prajapati compresses the embryo and throws it into the waters. Its juice becomes the Tortoise. The water above Tortoise is muddy with dissolved earth. Prajapati’s tapas heats this muddy water and foam emerges. Out of this foam come nine creations that constitute Bhumi or Earth. Prajapati then spreads out Bhumi, and in the form of Agni or Fire enters her. Everything that is emerges from this primordial copulation. Tortoise, we note, is beneath Bhumi, yet Tortoise is the life-sap of everything, for Tortoise encompasses all things even as he supports them. His bottom shell is this earthly world, his upper shell is the sky above, and air is the space in between.

The Pancharatra Agama teaches a visualization \(*dhyana*\) of this account in terms of the Bhagavan’s throne. The base of this cosmic throne is seen as the Bhagavan’s Supporting Power \(*adharashakti*\). On it rests the Tortoise \(Kamatha\), which is unbounded pure matter as the aggregate of all things and their stability. The Snake Ananta rests on the Tortoise. And the elements of the brahmanda universe rests on one of Ananta’s many hoods.4 By means of these allusions, this panel introduces the brahmanda as the theme of this bottom-floor vimana: The sphere of Brahma is God’s gross body \(*sthulasharira*\), a shape constituted of many shapes but incomprehensible to those living inside it \(*BP* 5.26.38\). Ananta, the Endless mode of matter on whose hood this brahmanda rests, appears diagonally opposite at the southeast corner \(Panel N6 discussed in chapter 13\).

This panel further signifies the inside of the brahmanda, where Vishnu rests on the bottom of the Milk Ocean as Tortoise again. In the sixth Manu Term, Hari takes the wondrous shape of the Primordial Tortoise \(Adikacchapa\). He is on the bottom of the Milk Ocean to prop up the mountain Mandara during its churning; still there, his steady breathing in and out creates the inhalation and exhalation of Brahma’s body, which we perceive in the ocean’s high and low tides \(*BP* 8.7.8–10; 12.13.2\).



### ***Panel W6: Brahma Venerates Varaha to Begin the Daytime of Boar***

THE STORY. Brahma’s life of one hundred Brahma-years is divided into halves. In the first half Brahma is born of Sound \(Shabdabrahma\). In the second half he is born in a Lotus Blossom \(Padmabrahma\). The first day of this second half of his lifetime is known as the Varaha Kalpa, Daytime of Boar \(*BP* 3.11.33–34; 3.12–13\).5 This panel illustrates the reason why.

Brahma is the embodied form that *“brahman’s* sound” \(*sabdabrahman*\) takes when it is both unmanifest and manifest \(*BP* 3.12.48\). The moving universe \(*jagat*\) is a materialization of that sound, because Brahma transformed his own body and mind into it. But first he had to organize the Plower’s self-imposed ignorance \(*ajnana*\) that was his own basis, which he did by emitting a sequence moving from the darkest to less dark modes of consciousness: “complete darkness” \(*andhatamisra*\), “darkness” \(*tamisra*\), “great confusion” \(*mahamoha*\), “infatuation” \(*moha*\), and “delusion” \(*tamas*\) \(*BP* 3.12.2\).6

Having necessarily, but regretfully, emitted those worst of sins \(*papiyasin*\), Brahma brought then forth their opposites, the four princes \(*kumara*\) named Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, and Sanatkumara. But they would not procreate when he told them to and remained celibate sages \(*BP* 3.12.4–5\). Angered by their disobedience, Rudra Shiva emerged from between Brahma’s eyes; he was the dark blue firstborn of devas. Brahma gave Rudra Shiva eleven names and eleven wives, who produced fierce replicas of him known as the Eleven Rudras \(Ekadasarudra\). The Eleven Rudras began devouring on all sides. At Brahma’s urging, Rudra Shiva retired himself and his names to perform tapas, for it is a quick way to attain the Bhagavan as Supreme Light \(*BP* 3.12.3–20\).

Brahma then produced a second set of children, ten sons from other parts of his body and mind, who would be willing to propagate and populate the universe. They were the class of sages called “lord of progeny” \(*prajapati*\), and were named Marichi \(mind\), Atri \(eye\), Angirasa \(mouth\), Pulastya \(ear\), Pulaha \(navel\), Kratu \(hand\), Bhrigu \(skin\), Vasishtha \(breath\), Daksha \(thumb\), and Narada \(lap\). He then produced a third set of nine: Dharma from his right breast where Narayana himself abides, and Adharma from his back, from which Death arises to terrify the world; Kama \(desire\) came from his heart, Krodha \(anger\) from his brow, Lobha \(greed\) from his lower lip, Vach \(speech\) from his mouth, rivers from his penis, and Nirriti \(disorder\), the refuge of all sins, from his anus \(*BP* 3.12.21–27\).7

Since Brahma is sound \(*shabda*\), it is not surprising that he felt desire for speech \(*vach*\). Unfortunately, Vach was his own daughter, born from his mouth. Brahma’s sons severely criticized his incestuous passion and, feeling ashamed, he abandoned his body. That abandoned body of incestuous shame became darkness in the four directions \(*BP* 3.12.28–34\).

Nevertheless, Brahma pursued his task. He emitted Veda from four faces in the sequence found in the so-called honeycomb mandala: *Rig* facing east, *Yajur* facing south, *Sama* facing west, and *Atharva* facing north \(*BP* 3.12.34–48\). Then he took on another form called Body \(*Kaya*\). He divided Body into a male and female couple \(*mithuna*\) named Svayambhuva Manu and his wife Shatarupa. They were the paradigm for sexual reproduction through the “dharma of couples” \(*BP* 3.12.49–56\). Brahma instructed them to have children who would protect Goddess Earth through Dharma and sacrifice to the Bhagavan who “excites people” \(Janardana\) \(*BP* 3.12.49–56\).

Svayambhu Manu agreed, of course, but said that Goddess Earth first had to be lifted up from the great ocean of Rasa \(Taste\) where she had some-how gone during Brahma’s emanating activities. “May he, from whose heart I came, do it for me,” Brahma said, and out of his nostril dropped a tiny boar \(*varaha*\) the size of a thumb \(*BP* 3.13\).

Instantly, while Brahma, Marichi, the Kumaras, and Svayambhu Manu watched, the tiny boar grew to the size of an elephant. While they pondered that perplexing figure who oddly had come out of Brahma’s nose, the mountainous Boar, Sacrifice as Person, roared, thrilling everyone and causing the residents of the Jana, Tapas, and Satya worlds to praise him with the *Rig, Yajur*, and *Sama Veda*.

As if he were the elephant Gajendra at play, Boar dived into the water \(*BP* 3.13.26\), recalling the Gajendra panel, Panel 5, at this same corner above on the middle floor. In the waters of Rasa he found Goddess Earth and lifted her up on his tusks. But a daitya appeared and attacked him; we later learn that he was the asura Hiranyaksha \(Golden Eyes\) \(*BP* 3.18.18\). Boar slew that demon, covering himself with red blood as if Gajendra were digging red earth in play. Then the bloody Boar stood in his dark blue body holding Goddess Earth on his white tusks while Brahma and the others praised him as Karanasukara, the Causal Boar whose shape is identical to the yajna sacrifice. Goddess Earth is Mother, Causal Boar is Father, and he emits his tejas into her so that she may produce all things \(*BP* 3.13.30–33\). His posture visually stated that the stability and fecundity of earth derives from the sacrificial rites of Veda patronized by its ruler \(*BP* 3.13.41\). Boar then stabilized the waters with his hoofs, placed Goddess Earth on them, and vanished \(*BP* 3.13.46–47\).

THE PANEL. The panel depicts Varaha just after he appears from Brahma’s nostril and swells up, but before he descends into the Rasa waters \(Figure 11.4\). The Bhagavan as Varaha with four arms stands on the south facing westward toward the viewer, but is oriented slightly to the north. His back two arms are not visible, but the conch is above his left shoulder and the wheel is above his right shoulder, with its edge facing forward as a prayogachakra, the wheel thrown as a missle. His front left hand rests on his left hip and his front right arm bends up at the elbow; its hand at the level of the right breast is now missing, but probably held a mudra, perhaps one signifying instruction. He has the snout, eyes, and ear of a boar, but the tusks are missing, and he is crowned.




FIGURE 11.4. Panel W6: Brahma venerates Varaha to begin the Daytime of Boar \(prior to repair\). Photo by Hudson, 1990.


To his right stands Brahma with four arms, bending slightly at the knees. His back two arms are difficult to see due to damage, but he holds the anjalimudra at the middle of his chest. Brahma has four faces, three of them visible, but now damaged \(Figure 11.5\). The face on his left \(south\) is damaged but obvious with its own distinct crown; the one on his right \(north\) is missing; the one in the middle \(west\) gazes slightly downward as if reverentially listening to Varaha at his left.




FIGURE 11.5. Brahma’s western face and damaged southern face \(detail, prior to repair\). Photo by Hudson, 1990.


Four two-armed figures facing forward and holding the anjalimudra stand above Brahma and Varaha. They are the Kumaras. A small figure flies or kneels to the left of Varaha at the level of his head, and remains of a similar figure between the heads of Varaha and Brahma are visible. A third figure probably stood to the right of Brahma’s head but has disappeared along with his right head. They are Marichi, Svayambhuva Manu, and presumably his wife Shatarupa.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. The panel represents the brahmamuhurta or Brahma’s hour, the final hour of night when the sounding of Vedic mantras brings the new universe, and new day, out of darkness. It identifies this daytime as the Varaha Kalpa, the Daytime of Boar, the first day of the second half of Brahma’s life—of his fifty-first year. It also anticipates Earth as a realm to be established by Vedic sacrifice through Hari, the Person of Sacrifice in the shape of Boar, and to be populated by Marichi and other prajapatis, and by Svayambhuva Manu and Shatarupa. Moreover, the panel signifies the highest realms of the brahmanda above the pole star Dhruva; these worlds do not burn up at the end of Brahma’s daytime. Finally, the four Kumaras at the top represent disengaged knowledge during Brahma’s creation of the brahmanda as a body for himself. This nonprocreative stance \(*nivritti*\) in the midst of impassioned procreation \(*pravritti*\) is the subject of the next side of the vimana, which faces north.

The next episode during this predawn period is the story of the asuras Madhu and Kaitabha stealing the Veda from Brahma. The Bhagavan first takes the shape of Hayagriva or Horsehead and retrieves the Veda for Brahma. \(Hayagriva appears around the corner in Panel NP1 discussed below.\) He then takes the shape of Madhusudana to slay the two asuras \(as discussed at Panel 19 in chapter 10\).



## **The Bracketed Panels**

Let us turn now to the four panels bracketed and defined by the two corner panels. We shall begin with Panel W2, discuss Panels W3 and W4 as a pair, and conclude with Panel W5.



### *******Panel W2: The Bhagavan on Lokaloka***

THE STORY. Shuka explains cosmography to Parikshit in Book Five of the *Bhagavata Purana* \(*BP* 5.16–26\). In this teaching, Heaven above and Rasa below belong to Earth as the realms of death and birth. Earth is enclosed by a mountain range that in width is one-fourth of Earth’s extent. It divides directional space \(*loka*\) from nondirectional space \(*aloka*\) and is therefore known as Lokaloka. A vast expanse of pure water separates this mountain range from the seventh and outermost continent of Earth known as Pushkara or Blue Water Lily. No light of Surya the Sun goes beyond Lokaloka, and four elephants stand on it to stabilize space with the cardinal directions. To protect the world and its inhabitants inside Lokaloka, the Supreme Transcendent Person, the Great Master of Powers, the Inner Controller of the Atman, appears on all its sides in a single material shape of purity holding his weapons in the company of Vishvaksena and others \(*BP* 5.20.34–41\). Also with him are righteousness \(*dharma*\), knowledge \(*jnana*\), renunciation \(*vairagya*\), sovereignty \(*aishvarya*\) and others; and the eight great occult powers \(*mahasiddhi*\) described at Panel 19 in chapter 10.

THE PANEL. At the bottom of this badly damaged panel sit two male figures \(Figure 11.6\). The larger, on the viewer’s right, is Shuka, who is teaching Parikshit, the figure who sits slightly behind him and is therefore smaller in size. The subject of Shuka’s lesson is Lokaloka, where the Bhagavan sits, as illustrated by the scene above.




FIGURE 11.6. Panel W2: The Bhagavan on Lokaloka. IFDI.


The central figure in this scene depicts the pure shape of the Bhagavan as he sits on all sides of Lokaloka. An object above his head denotes the central axis running down the middle of the Bhagavan’s figure to divide the panel in halves. He sits in the posture of relaxation \(*lalitasana*\) and has four faces directed toward the cardinal directions, three of which are visible. He also has two pairs of arms. The hands of his back pair hold the wheel and conch, whose remnants are visible; and the wheel may be positioned as a prayogachakra. His front left hand rests in his lap as his front right arm rises up to form a mudra, but the arm is broken off above the elbow. To replicate the meaning of the prayogachakra above it, the missing hand probably formed the abhayamudra of protection: the open hand faces the viewer with thumb and fingers straight up \(*PS* 1974: 45\).

Six figures accompany the Bhagavan, three on each side. The three on his right are visible: the faces of two are at the level of the Bhagavan’s head and crown, and the third stands near his right side. The upper two figures on the left side have been effaced, but the third remains at his left side, standing and forming the anjalimudra. He is probably Vishvaksena. The identity of the others is undetermined.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel represents the outermost sheath of the brahmanda or universe, the division between directional space and chronological time inside, and nondirectional space and unmeasured time on the outside. The protection of the Bhagavan in a shape made of purity on Lokaloka counters the disintegrative meaning of this panel’s dark location at the southwest portion of the mandala. The Bhagavan’s four faces repeat the four faces of the durgapala Narayana sitting in a similar southwest location on the sanctum above \(Panel 16\). Both depict the Bhagavan’s “highest shape of supreme sovereignty,” which has a face in every direction \(*BG* 11.11\). Moreover, the Bhagavan on Lokaloka is the inner controller of Brahma’s body and of those it contains; and as Surya the Sun he is their external controller, appearing ahead at the analogous northwest position in Panel W5.



### ***Panel W3: Kalki above Devapi of the Lunar Dynasty***

### ***Panel W4: Kalki above Maru of the Solar Dynasty***

Two panels with identical depictions of Kalki riding his white horse Devadatta appear above the panels on each side of the porch entrance. Each stands adjacent to a lion pillar placed next to a male dvarapala. We shall discuss these panels as a pair.

THE STORY. Kalki, known also as Shasta or Punisher, is the avatara appearing at the end of the Kali Yuga to defeat the asura Kali, who takes over the rule of Bharata when Krishna leaves his human embodiment at Prabhasa \(*BP* 2.7.38; 12.2.17–39\).8 Kali will dominate Bharata for 1,200 deva years, or 432,000 human years. Throughout this time two yogin representatives of the Lunar and Solar dynasties survive in the village of Kalapa: Devapi of the Lunar Dynasty and Maru of the Solar Dynasty. At the end of the age, the Bhagavan will direct them to reestablish the proper dharma of varna or ritual class, jati or caste, and ashrama or stage of life; and will descend as Kalki to protect this dharma of good people \(*BP* 12.2.17–24\).

Kalki will be born to Vishnuyashas, the renowned Brahmin headman of the village named Shambhala, and he will ride a swift white horse named Devadatta. Possessing eight sovereign powers, he will speed over Bharata destroying hundreds of thousands of evil people who falsely wear the emblems of protectors. After he removes all evil in towns and villages, the fragrance blown from the perfume on his body will purify peoples’ minds. Once this material form of purity enters their hearts where consciousness resides, they will beget powerful children, and their progeny will be of a pure nature. The Krita Yuga will then begin, because Moon, Sun, and Jupiter will be in the same house, and the star Pushya will be ascendant.

Until then, however, life on Bharata worsens considerably \(*BP* 12.2–11\): There is heavy taxation and Shudras, barbarians \(*mleccha*\), and imposters \(*pakhanda*\) exercise power harshly. Religious insignia are meaningless, money rules in court, ostentation is considered character, mating is marriage, and bathing is no longer a ceremonial rite. People observe dharma only for show, and greedy and cruel rulers force their subjects to flee to mountains and forests where they fight among themselves. There is hunger, thirst, disease, and worry, and people live at most twenty or thirty years.

As recorded in Book Twelve of the *Bhagavata Purana*, Shuka told the emperor Parikshit about the political figures and events of the Kali Yuga; since they were living at its very beginning he described them in the future tense. I will summarize them here, however, in the past tense, as viewed from the perspective of eighth-century Kanchipuram. Shuka began with the geo-graphical mandala of the Indus and Ganges region. Its east-west axis extended from the Bay of Bengal in the east to the Arabian Sea in the west, and its north-south axis extended from the Himalayas in the north to the Vindhyas in the south. He began with Magadha in the east, moved to Vidisha in the west, then clockwise to the north; after describing the south he returned to a new age in Magadha in the east. He described an aggressive king in Magadha known as Vishvasphurji \(Thundering Everywhere\), who appears to be Chandra Gupta II \(ca. 376–415 CE\). He turned the higher classes \(*varna*\) into Pulindas, Yadus, and Madrakas \(tribes outside the varna system\), and wiped out the dominion of those possessing virya. He created a capital at Padmavati \(a name for Ujjaini, the capital of ancient Malwa\). The realm of his “thunder,” Shuka said, extended from the “Door of Ganga” \(Gangadvara\) at modern Haridvara to that river’s junction with the Yamuna at Prayaga \(modern Allahahad\) \(*BP* 12.1.36–37\).

Why did Shuka resent the thundering Madagha king who appears to have been Chandra Gupta II? Because, Shuka said, he had wiped out the Vedic-based order of the four classes, which is the order of society Krishna created \(*BG* 4.13\). More tellingly, he had also wiped out the dominion of those possessing virya. In Bhagavata terms, *virya* means the sovereign ability to act without being affected by the action, a quality that Bhagavata rulers believed emanated from the Pre-eminently Mighty Pradyumna formation. Bhagavatas believed Vasudeva used such rulers as his instrumental slaves. Shuka apparently resented the fact that by conquering the Shakas in Ujjaini, Chandra Gupta II had eliminated minor Bhagavata rulers, had removed their power to enforce the order of four classes within their realms, and had thereby allowed low-status Pulindas, Yadus, and Madrakas to ascend politically and socially.

During that same period, Vratyas and barbarians \(*mleccha*\) \(probably the Hunas who ruled ca. 500–530\) took over the northwest. Shuka said those barbarian rulers were unrighteous \(*adharma*\) and chaotic \(*anrita*\),9 and murdered women, children, Brahmins, and cows. They were short-lived weaklings overpowered by passion and delusion; they stole the wives and wealth of others and oppressed their subjects. In turn, their subjects adapted to barbarian behavior and language and fought with each other. Thenceforth conditions only worsened \(*BP* 12.2\).

By the *Bhagavata Purana’s* own calculation, the building of the Emperor’s Vishnu-house took place thousands of years after the Dvapara Yuga. Shuka’s predictions about the Kali Yuga may therefore be read as a pious Bhagavata’s critical view of the age in which he lived in the light of an idealized previous age. Given the location of this Vishnu-house in the deep south of eighth-century Bharata, it is notable that all the events Shuka described took place earlier in the north, in the paradigmatic Aryavarta \(Realm of the Nobles\). The Bhagavata Dharma had come from that region to the Tamil speakers, perhaps as early as the third century BCE \(Hudson: 1993d and 1994\); for Bhagavatas it was the realm of the idealized Dvapara Yuga of Krishna’s lifetime. Bhagavatas attributed any aspect of “noble” culture in the north that by then did not match the ideal society of the Pandavas to the disintegrating power of Time \(*BP* 12.2.1\).

Shuka’s description suggests that such had been the political reality in part of Bharata for centuries if not millennia. Yet, as we shall see, the *Bhagavata Purana* \(*BP* 11.5.38–40\) also tells us that an agamic religious renaissance in the Dravidian regions of the Pallavas, Cholas, Pandyans, Cheras, and others had long been under way by the time the Vishnu-house was built about 770. Compared to the piety expressed by Dravida poets and temple builders, the distant kingdoms north of the Vindhyas, along the western sea, in the Indus Valley, in Afghanistan, in Kashmir, and along the Yamuna and Ganga rivers appeared to have been hit especially hard by Time’s degenerating power. Nevertheless, that same Bhagavata piety viewed the expanding Dravida civilizations in which it was flourishing as imperfect, too. When Shuka described the Kali Yuga, he said that Goddess Earth laughed at the kings who thought they would live long and gain control of her step by step. She criticized, it appears, the efforts of Pallavas and Pandyas and others from the early centuries CE to expand into Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia. Kings in the Kali Yuga first seek to master their five senses and the mind, and then they try to win over neighboring kings through diplomacy. That allows them to gain control of the whole land up to the sea. Some even cross the sea to conquer other lands. They all fight with one another and end up dying, all for the sake of claiming land. Yet all the great kings of the past, both human and asura, who thought they could possess Earth have died and are reduced to names in legends \(*BP* 12.3.3–13\).

Shuka concluded his history lesson by telling Parikshit that those stories of glorious and famous men in the world are merely words meant to teach insight into the transient nature of life and detachment from it. Hope lies not in those legends, he said, but in the story of the Uttamashloka, because that story generates devotion to Krishna \(*BP* 12.3.14–15\).10 Devotion to Krishna, of course, had been expressed in Tamil poems of the Sangam period \(first to fourth centuries CE\), and in the *Chilappatikaram* \(ca. fifth century\) and the *Manimekalai* \(ca. sixth century\). During the agamic renaissance in the south where this Vishnu-house was built, it was also producing the poems of the Alvars.

Shuka went on to explain that in the Kali Yuga, Dharma is three-fourths gone \(*BP* 12.3.24–40\). Only a quarter of truth \(*satya*\), compassion \(*daya*\), asceticism \(*tapas*\), and giving \(*dana*\) exist, and eventually they, too, will be overwhelmed completely by adharma. Shudras, fishermen, and others of low status are held in esteem, and delusion \(*tamas*\) dominates over passion \(*rajas*\) and purity \(*sattva*\). Imposters \(*pakhanda*\) condemn Veda, kings “consume” people, and the twice-born \(Brahmins\) live only to enjoy sex and fill their bellies. Students of Veda \(*brahmacharin*\) give up their rules, householders beg, forest dwellers live in villages, and renunciants \(*sannyasin*\) are greedy for money. Shudras dress as ascetics and accept gifts. Moreover, those who sit on the seats of respected teachers to teach Dharma know only Adharma.

That pious Bhagavata judgment no doubt applied to Kanchipuram, Madurai, and other southern towns and cities of the time, as it certainly did to portions of the north, at least in Shuka’s mind. What a modern point of view may see as the pluralistic flourishing of many religious and ethnic groups, and as the proper sharing of political power between a variety of castes, high-status and low, pious Bhagavatas saw as degeneration symptomatic of demonic rule. Yet they did not call for social revolution. Instead, they called for accommodation to Time’s degenerating course until the coming of Kalki. Let us consider two examples.

The first has to do with marriage. The common Dravida practice of arranging cross-cousin marriages disturbed Shuka, because it enhances the role of the mother’s brother and of her lineage in the family, and diminishes the dominant authority of the father’s lineage characteristic of the Vedic ideal. As Shuka said, “In the Kali Yuga, a man abandons his own father, brothers, relatives, and friends and aligns with his wife and her family” \(*BP* 12.3.37\). But he did not say that the practice should be prohibited, only that it is a symptom of Kali Yuga degeneration. Devotees can counteract it by taking refuge in Krishna, which is the implication of the “supreme verse” \(*uttamashloka*\) of the *Bhagavad-gita* \(18.66\): “Give up all dharmas and take refuge in me alone and I will free you from all sins, have no care.” One does not need to abandon a customary practice even if it contradicts the Veda. Instead, one may live with it; and to be saved from the inevitable sin of it, relying not on customs that are correct according to Veda \(*dharmas*\) but rather on Vasudeva Krishna’s loving and gracious protection of those who cling to him from the stain of sin.

As the second example, Shuka mentioned the imposters \(*pakhanda*\) who turn the minds of people away from the Immoveable \(Achyuta\), who then do not worship him and become polluted. In the Pallava domain, they were the Buddhists, Jainas, Ajivikas, Kapalikas, Kalamukhas, and Aghoras whose origin, as we discussed in chapter 10, is represented by Prithu’s horse sacrifice at the southwest corner of disorder \(*nirriti*\) on the middle-floor sanctum \(Figure 10.2\). Even though imposters teach Adharma as if it were Dharma, Shuka did not urge social revolt against them; he urged personal devotion to Krishna instead. Krishna is the Supreme Person abiding in the minds of people and therefore can destroy the evil that Kali creates through substance, place, and mind \(*BP* 12.3.43–45\).

If, Shuka continued, the Bhagavan abiding in the center of consciousness \(*hritstha*\) is heard about \(*shruta*\), sung about \(*sankirtita*\), visualized \(*dhyata*\), and worshiped \(*pujita*\), or even just respected \(*adrita*\), he will remove pollution \(*ashubha*\) from all births. Nothing can achieve such purity \(*shuddhi*\) except the Bhagavan residing in the center of consciousness \(*hridistha*\)—not learning, not asceticism, not breath control, not friendliness to all, not bathing in holy places, not vows, not giving, and not the repetition of mantras \(*BP* 12.3.46–48\). Furthermore, the purification of consciousness is easy, because the devotee receives the aid of others through the communal worship called kirtana. “The age of Kali is full of evil, yet it has one good quality. Just by singing of the Bhagavan’s glories \(*kirtana*\) one will join the assembly of the freed \(*muktasanga*\) that belongs to Krishna. Whatever is attained in the Krita Yuga by visualizing Vishnu, whatever is attained in the Treta Yuga by sacrificial rites, whatever is attained in the Dvapara Yuga by rituals of worshipful service, is attained in the Kali Yuga just by singing his glories” \(*BP* 12.3.51–52\).

Singing Krishna’s glories is what the Alvar poets did. They did so with such skilled and learned devotion that later acharyas in Kanchipuram and Sri Rangam recognized their collected “Four Thousand Divine Stanzas” to be the “Tamil Veda” \(Carman and Narayanana 1989; Narayanan 1994\).

Now that we have been introduced to the Kali Yuga—from which viewers entering the temple have symbolically just emerged—let us turn to the two panels \(W3 and W4\) depicting the cause of it all, Time. They depict the Inner Controller at the southwest and the External Controller at the northwest.

THE PANELS. These two panels resemble each other closely \(Figures 11.7, 11.8\). At the top of each sits Kalki astride his horse Devadatta facing northward, perhaps to direct the worshiper in the clockwise direction of circumambulation. Kalki holds the reins with his right hand, and with his left hand raises a sword high above and behind his head. Below Kalki stand large and similar depictions of the two kings who will renew the two Kshatriya dynasties in the forthcoming Krita Yuga: Devapi of the Lunar Dynasty to the south and Maru of the Solar Dynasty to the north. Both have one pair of arms, are crowned, and are dressed royally. But there are variations.




FIGURE 11.7. Panel W3: Kalki above Devapi of the Lunar Dy nasty \(prior to repair\). IFDI.





FIGURE 11.8. Panel W4: Kalki above Maru of the Solar Dynasty \(prior to repair\). IFDI.


Devapi on the lunar south \(to the viewer’s right, Figure 11.7\) appears to form the grahamudra, “mudra of the eclipse”: his left hand is near or supports his right elbow, and his right hand faces its palm forward with thumb open and fingers bent toward the palm \(*PS* 1974: 97\). A damaged depiction of a large unidentified person stands to Devapi’s left; a smaller person stands to his right, partly hidden by the lion, and may signify worship of the moon.

On the solar north \(to the viewer’s left, Figure 11.8\), Maru appears to have a halo behind his head, which suggests the sun. His right hand at his stomach forms what appears to be the tattvamudra: the thumb and index finger are touching and three fingers are extended \(*PS* 1974: 72\). His left shoulder and arm are set back into the niche, and his left hand holds an unidentified object at his chest. An unidentified crowned person, with right arm and hand hidden in the niche, stands to his right, looks to the southwest, and raises his left hand with fingers open at the side of his chest. A much smaller figure without a crown and only a garment around his waist stands to Maru’s left. He is not in a niche and reaches from Maru’s knees to his chest. His feet are spread apart facing south, and a rope encircles his ankles, or perhaps two large anklets appear as merged. He bends forward at the hips, arches his back toward the north, twists his chest westward, stretches his two arms above his head, and joins his fingers to form a circle through which he gazes. He depicts Yajnavalkya using the Gayatri mantra to worship Surya the Sun. After this, Hari appears to him in the shape of a horse with a mane \(*vajirupa*\) and teaches him previously unknown Yajus mantras \(*BP* 12.6.66–74\).

THE PANELS’ MEANINGS. Both panels represent the region of Bharata on the Jambu continent, and Kalki astride Devadatta identifies this western side with the Kali Yuga on Bharata. But the large figures below point to its eventual end. The lunar Devapi south of the entrance and the solar Maru north of the entrance define the porch face as the middle of the night, with its beginning on the south and its ending on the north. This meaning corresponds to the midnight meaning of the porch above on the middle-floor sanctum. In both depictions Kalki faces northward, the direction of circumambulation \(*pradakshina*\), as if to indicate that the program of this ardhamandapa and vimana is a continuous clockwise sequence beginning on this western side. Finally, the appearance of the Bhagavan to Yajnavalkya in the shape of a horse to reveal Vedic mantras refers to the two-part account of Hayagriva and Madhusudana discusssed above, and to Hayagriva worshiped in the Bhadrashva region of Jambu discussed below.



### ***Panel W5. Surya the Sun Flies over the Continent of Plaksha***

THE STORY. The continent of Jambu exists at the center of Earth and the ocean of salt surrounds it. Around this salt ocean is the second of Earth’s seven continents. Just as Jambu receives its name from the roseapple \(*jambu*\) tree standing on it, this continent receives the name Plaksha from its waved-leaf fig tree \(*plaksha*\). The Bhagavan dwells there in the shape of a fire with seven tongues of flame \(*BP* 5.20.1–6; 20\). This continent contains seven mountains and seven rivers, and Priyavrata’s second son, Idhmajihva, divided it into seven regions to be ruled by his seven sons. River water purifies its inhabitants, who are divided into the four ritual classes, live one thousand years, and resemble devas. Idhmajihva and his sons and their subjects worship Vishnu in the shape of Surya the Sun, who is the basis of all that exists, the basis of life and death, and the Ruler of Sight.

According to the theology of the formations, Surya manifests Vishnu, and Vishnu manifests the Vasudeva formation dwelling as Self or Atman in all bodies \(*BP* 12.11.27–50\). Vishnu and Surya are modes of Vasudeva. Vishnu as Surya originated all Vedic rites by means of Yajnavalkya, and assumed the form of chronological time \(*kalarupa*\) in order to control the world \(*lokatantra*\). Throughout each kalpa, he revolves around the universe in the company of twelve sets of attendants, completing one circuit in twelve months.

Circumambulation pradakshina \(clockwise\) imitates Surya’s revolution. Gazing at this panel, visitors face east and see Sun as those in Plaksha worship him. The sculpted figure moves toward the west in a slightly northward orientation that suggests the sun’s northward journey \(*uttarayana*\) after the winter solstice; it begins the half year thought to be the daytime of the devas. Yet the panel does not represent sunrise on Bharata, but rather on Plaksha further to the east; sunrise there is experienced here as late night. The panel thus represents the dark period of our night \(2–4 a.m.\), prior to the glow in the east during the predawn “hour of Brahma” \(4–6 a.m.\).

The scene also alludes to the Gayatri mantra, which is to be recited in the morning as Surya rises. The sun-worshiping figure in the previous Kalki and Maru panel, who is probably Yajnavalka, points to it. Yajnavalka’s prayer to Sun was the origin of all Vedic rites and itself a commentary on the meaning of the Gayatri \(*BP* 12.6.66–72\). In response, the Bhagavan appeared to him as a horse and taught him Yajus mantras; until then they were unknown to anyone. Yajnavalkya divided them into fifteen recensions known as the Vajasanis \(“derived from the mane of the horse” or “obtained from the speedy one”\). That story anticipates the depiction of Hayagriva \(Horsehead\) in the next panel around the corner \(Panel NP1\).

Inhabitants of the other continents on earth also worship the Bhagavan in specific forms. On Shalmala, the continent that immediately surrounds Plaksha, Veda is used to worship the Self as Soma the Moon made of Veda \(*BP* 5.20.7–12\). Moon, the indestructible place of the sacrifice \(*yajna*\) once placed there by devas, became the ancestral progenitor of the three fires of the Vedic sacrifice. Moon descended from Brahma through Atri \(*BP* 9.14.1–14\); and the threefold fire, Jatavedas, descended from Moon through Budha and Pururava \(*BP* 9.14.15–49\). Moon appears with Daksha and Dattatreya on the south-facing corner of the vimana \(Panel SP1\).

On the next three continents after Shalmala, beings worship him in forms that are not represented on the Vishnu-house: on Kusha as the threefold Vedic fire \(Jatavedas\); on Krauncha as water \(Apah\); and on Saka as air \(Vayu\). On the seventh continent, Pushkara, they worship him as Brahma with the lotus of thousands of shining petals as depicted at the east-facing northeast corner \(Panel E1\). Finally, we come to the boundary between directional and nondirectional space, the Lokaloka mountain range depicted at the other corner of the porch, as already discussed.

THE PANEL. The damaged panel is divided diagonally \(Figure 11.9\). Surya with two pairs of arms fills the upper portion to the south. His left leg extending down the south side touches the bottom of his foot to the panel’s frame, and his right knee pulls up in the act of flying \(a posture repeated by flying figures on other panels\). Surya faces slightly northward and his tall crown slants slightly south. Damaged plaster obscures the details of his dress and of the space above him. His back pair of hands hold the wheel and conch. His front left hand at the level of his breast bends its fingers inward with the forefinger slightly elevated to suggest the dipamudra of light \(*PS* 1974: 96\). His open right hand bends down in the varadamudra of giving \(*PS* 1974: 45\).




FIGURE 11.9. Panel W5: Surya the Sun flies over the continent of Plaksha. Source unidentified.


The eight males balancing the four-armed flying figure of Sun are Idhmajihva and his seven sons, who rule the continent. Idhmajihva is probably the bottom figure gesturing toward Surya. He divided the Plaksha continent into seven realms for his seven sons and then took to the contemplative life. All eight males worship Sun, “Ruler of Sight” \(Drigishvara\), the visible external mode of the Bhagavan’s activity as controller of all things \(*BP* 5.20.5; 5.20.46\).

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel represents the continent of Plaksha, the circular continent adjacent to Jambu with Mount Meru at its center. This is the first of six that extend outward from the center and are enclosed by Lokaloka, which is represented at the analogous southwestern position at Panel W2. It also represents the penultimate hour of night on Bharata, when Surya passes over Plaksha toward Jambu on his way to bring Bharata the last of night. Viewers face east to see Surya being worshiped in Plaksha before he reaches Jambu. It reveals that circumambulation imitates the pradakshina direction of Surya’s clockwise revolution, keeping Mount Meru to his right. Furthermore, it depicts Vasudeva, who dwells in all bodies as the atman, and who is the root of Veda and its ceremonies, in the shape of Time \(Kalarupa\) controlling the world through the year’s twelve months \(*BP* 12.11.29–33\). Surya the external controller depicted here in Panel W5 forms a complementary pair with the depiction in Panel W2 of the inner controller dwelling on Lokaloka.




