+++
title = "13 The Vimana Panels on the Northern Side"

+++





The vimana’s northern side depicts the Plower formation’s jnana or knowledge, and bala or transformative power, as they are relevant to human life on Bharata. Numerical symbolism for Vasudeva’s three vyuha formations begins with this side; the design of each corner panel visually encodes the numerical place of the formation it signifies: one, two, or three. The four panels bracketed by the two at the corners illustrate the Plower’s power and knowledge. The two panels west of the wall’s central opening illustrate bala through the life of Narada \(Panel N2\) and the birth of Kapila \(Panel N3\). The two panels east of the central opening illustrate jnana with the supreme secret that Vasudeva teaches Brahma \(Panel N4\), and the eight-syllable mantra, *Om namo narayanaya* \(*Om* veneration to Narayana\) represented by the rishi Nara venerating the rishi Narayana \(Panel N5\).



## **The Two Corner Panels**

### ***Panel N1: Vasudeva Teaching as Vaikunthanatha***

THE STORY. According to the story \(*BP* 2.9\), when Brahma awoke in the lotus, he did not know how to create, so he sat down. Sitting in the lotus, he heard the letters *ta* and *pa* emerge from the surrounding waters. He knew it meant tapas and was divine instruction, so he practiced tapas for one thousand deva years, concentrating on the topic of emanation. Eventually, the Bhagavan revealed his own realm beyond purity \(*sattva*\), passion \(*rajas*\), and delusion \(*tamas*\), beyond Time, and beyond maya, a vision granted to those who follow the tapas path of Paramahamsa ascetics \(*BP* 2.9.17\). It was the Imperishable Un-manifest that Krishna described as beyond thought and extremely difficult for humans to see \(*BG* 12.1–12\). It is transcendent Vaikuntha.

In that realm where purity does not mix with passion or delusion, and where Time and maya have no authority, Brahma saw that Vasudeva’s attendants, whom both devas and asuras worship, look like him in miniature: They have dark blue bodies, four arms, lotus eyes, yellow garments, crowns, garlands, and brilliant jewels \(*BP* 2.9.10–11\). Brahma saw the Bhagavan attended by his four chief attendants, Sunanda, Nanda, Prabala, and Arhana, and by others \(*BP* 2.9.15–16\). He had four arms, brilliant reddish eyes, a smile, the shrivatsa on his chest, and wore a yellow garment, a crown, and earrings. He sat on a throne surrounded by the twenty-five powers \(*shakti*\) of sankhya and in union with his glorious excellences \(*bhaga*\) \(*BP* 2.9.16; Tagare 1976–1979 1: 206\).1

THE PANEL. This panel portrays the shape Brahma sees when Vasudeva teaches him during the predawn hour before his Daytime of Boar \(*BP* 2.9.5–36\). Vasudeva appears as the dominant figure in his own world \(*svaloka*\) \(Figure 13.1\). He sits in the middle of the panel in the posture of ease \(*lalitasana*\) looking directly north. He wears a tall crown and has two pairs of arms. The damaged hands of the back pair probably held the wheel and conch, as usual. His front left hand rests in his lap as if holding a palm-leaf book, and his front right arm bends up to form a mudra with its damaged hand, probably the jnanamudra or tattvamudra of knowledge and teaching: the open right hand is held at the right breast, the tips of the thumb and forefinger touch, and the remaining fingers extend upward \(*PS* 1974: 72\).




FIGURE 13.1. Panel N1: Vasudeva teaching as Vaikuntanatha. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Six symmetrically arranged males frame Vasudeva, three on each side, whom Brahma names in his description of this scene \(*BP* 2.9.14\). The four large males on either side are his four great attendants. The figure standing to his right \(east\) forms the anjalimudra of veneration and has a large circular halo around his head. He is Sunanda \(Delighting\), who alludes to Surya waiting to emerge from the east to delight others. His flying companion on the opposite side \(west\) bends his left leg backward and raises his right knee to the level of his waist. He is Nanda \(Pleasing\), who alludes to the pleasing light of Soma the Moon moving westward. Prabala \(Might\) and Arhana \(Honor\) are the two crowned figures sitting on the ground at the level of Vasudeva’s foot-stool, their legs crossed in front with their knees raised. Prabala as might is beneath Vasudeva’s right hand, Arhana as honor is beneath his left hand. Whatever mudras they hold are lost by damage. The smaller upper figures, often found on other panels, are a subordinate category of being. They mark the panel’s vertical axis running down through Vasudeva’s crown.

The depiction points to two other panels. One depicts Gajendra on White Island in the Ocean of Milk directly above on the middle floor. The other depicts Vaikunthanatha in Vaikuntha on White Island at the south-facing corner of the porch \(Panel SP3, Figure 12.3\). Vaikuntha was established on White Island during the fifth manvantara as Bhagavan’s presence in the consciousness \(*chitta*\) in Brahma’s body.




FIGURE 13.2. Panel N6: Ananta the Endless \(prior to repair\). AIIS.


Later Pancharatra texts suggest that Vaikunthanatha seated here also points ahead to panels on this same side \(Smith and Venkatachari 1969:191–192\). One text said that Vaikunthanatha has a book in his left hand and the teaching gesture \(*upadesamudra*\) in his right, and that he divided Veda into four parts as Vyasa the Compiler \(Panel N2\). Another text identified the seer Kapila \(Panel N3\) as Lord of the Moving Universe \(Jagannatha\) who is the inner witness of all beings and holds the gesture meaning “do not fear” \(*abhayamudra*\)*. A* third said he is androgynous: his male half is Krishna’s elder brother Balarama the Plower and his female half is Krishna’s younger sister Subhadra.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This single dominant depiction of Vasudeva as Teacher signifies His first formation, Samkarshana the Plower of jnana knowledge and bala power. It depicts Vishnu’s Supreme Home, which is beyond Lokaloka and transcendent to Brahma’s body of spacetime. Vasudeva Krishna reveals this Home to gopas in Gokula \(*BP* 10.28.14–17\), and describes it to Arjuna on the Kuru Field as his realm \(*padam*\) without change, not illumined by sun, moon, or fire, “my highest home” from which no one ever falls \(*BG* 15. 5–6\). It also represents Krishna’s teachings to Brahma in the lotus called the *Bhagavatam* \(*BP* 3.5–7\).

This panel alludes, moreover, to Vaikuntham on Earth northwest of Mount Meru in the Ocean of Milk. In the fifth Manu Term, a part of Vasudeva is born through Subhra’s wife, Vikuntha, and is known as Vaikuntha; a group of devas are similarly born through her and are known as the Vaikunthas. For the pleasure of Rama the Beloved, Vaikuntha creates a pure realm on Earth also called Vaikuntham; it is located on a three-peaked island in the Ocean of Milk northwest of Bharata, which is the location of this panel on the temple mandala. Everyone who goes there is beyond Yama’s reach. Its residents possess Vaikuntha’s material form, and his body is purity \(*sattvam*\) free of passion \(*BP* 8.5.1–6; 3.15.12–50\). The Bhagavan Vaikuntha resides there as Lord of Vaikunhta \(Vaikunthanatha\), and because of his brilliance his domain is known as White Island \(Shvetadvipa\).



### ***Panel N6: Ananta the Endless***

THE STORY. In contrast to Vaikuntha’s brilliant purity “above” the brahmanda, this panel at the opposite northeast corner depicts a dark part of the Bhagavan “beneath” the brahmanda as the self-deluded or “inebriated” snake Ananta, the Endless or Infinite, in the “realm of the root” \(*muladesha*\), thirty thousand yojanas below the Patala level of Brahma’s spacetime body, which sits on one of Ananta’s many hoods \(*BP* 5.25.1\). As spacetime’s nadir, Ananta supports Brahma’s “spine,” a vertical axis running up through earth’s central Ilavrita region, through Mount Meru at its center, through the sky to Dhruva the pole star, and beyond to Satyaloka.

Shuka said that according the Satvata or Pancharatra doctrine, the delusive \(*tamasika*\) Samkarshana is the power that draws the one who sees and the object seen together into the “I” \(*samkarshanamaham*\), and from this comes his name \(BP 5.25.2–13\). Out of play \(*lila*\), the Plower graciously takes a material form of purified purity, white in color and blue in clothing, to reside in that “root” of the lower world. He supports spacetime on only one of his thousand hoods, and it appears the size of a mustard seed. Samkarshana’s reddish eyes roll with intoxication, and when daughters of snakes \(*naga*\) touch his arms he stimulates their erotic feelings. \(His form for dhyana is described in 5.25.7–13, 5.17.17–24, and 6.16.18–64.\)

When Brahma’s daytime ends, the eleven Rudra formations \(*vyuha*\) will emerge from Ananta’s forehead to destroy the three worlds of death and birth and bring on Brahma’s night. In the meantime, Satvatas focused in bhakti yoga worship him along with nagas, and naga princesses approach him for blessings. The rishi Narada with the gandharva musician Tumburu sings to his father Brahma about Ananta’s material form of pure matter established on his self, a material form he assumes in play at the base of the dark Rasa waters for the sake of mankind. Brahma’s son youngest Kumara son, Sanatkumara, leads other rishis dripping with Ganga’s water to Ananta to learn about Vasudeva, who is the object of Ananta’s contemplation. When Santakumara touches Ananta’s foot, he awakes from contemplation of Vasudeva and teaches him the long *Bhagavata Purana* \(*BP* 3.8–4.31\).

Rudra Shiva, the only male dwelling in the central Ilavrita region, worships Samkarshana as depicted here \(*BP* 5.17.14–24\). When Brahma goes to sleep, the Eleven Rudras formation emerges from Samkarshana’s forehead. Known as “Samkarshana’s progeny,” each of them, like Rudra Shiva, possesses three eyes and a trident \(*BP* 5.25.3; following Goswami 1995 1: 359\). To fulfill their devouring nature they burn up the universe, beginning at its bottom.

THE PANEL. Maitreya described this scene to Vidura \(BP 3.8.3–9; also 5.25\). Samkarshana’s thousand hoods, he said, have crowns studded with brilliant gems; here they have been reduced to one resting on a single human head \(Figure 13.2\): Ananta with two pairs of arms and a tall crown resembles Samkarshana sitting in royal ease \(rajalilasanam\) on the sanctum wall inside. But his left foot rests on the throne, not his right, and we can see the toes of his right rather than left foot resting on a stool in front of the throne. His front right hand placed on the throne bears his weight. His front left elbow rests on his left knee. And his left hand forms a damaged mudra; perhaps it is the tattvasrishtimudra \(emanation of the constituents\): the forefinger is raised up and other fingers curl down over the thumb bent to the palm \(PS 1974: 78\).

To his left stands a daughter of Vasuki, Patala’s premier naga \(*BP* 5.24.31\). She stands slightly behind Ananta’s left and forms the anjalimudra with her two hands. She has come to ask for a husband \(*BP* 5.25.4–5; 3.8.5–6\). Directly above her appears the torso and uncrowned head of a male gesturing in praise with his open right hand. He is the ruler of Shurasena named Chitraketu, who experiences Samkarshana by means of a mantra Narada taught him \(*BP* 6.15.27; 6.16.18–65\). Chitraketu will be born as the ruler of vidyadharas \(bearers of the knowledge of spells\), and after that as the asura named Vritra, two identities that illustrate the Plower’s intentional defilement of jnana \(*BP* 6.14–17\).2

At the bottom of the panel in the eastern corner sits Sanatkumara, who has come there to learn about Vasudeva; he has just touched Samkarshana’s foot with his head dripping Ganga’s water. He has piled matted hair, long earlobes, armbands around his forearms, and a cloth around his waist. His left hand is damaged and the mudra formed by his right hand at his breast is difficult to read; it may be the tattvamudra or jnanamudra of knowledge or teaching \(*PS* 1974: 72\). Samkarshana, who had been absorbed in contemplating Vasudeva, has just opened his eyes to bless him.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This large central figure of Ananta signifies the self-deluded aspect of Vasudeva’s first formation as the basis for everything. It depicts this intentionally “inebriated” endless matter as the support for Brahma’s body throughout his Daytime of Boar \(and it implies Tortoise as Ananta’s support, the subject of Panel W1 discussed in chapter 11\). The panel also represents the lesson Samkarshana teaches—about Brahma’s lotus, Time, the Daytime of Boar, and Brahma populating the brahmanda—called the *Bhagavata Purana* \(*BP* 3.8.10–4.31\).

Samkarshana taught Sanatkumara the *Bhagavatam* \(*BP* 3.8.7\), which is much of Maitreya’s teaching in Books Three and Four, but without its opening three chapters on cosmogony \(*BP* 3.5–7\). Sanatkumara passed that *Bhagavatam* on to Sankhyayana, and he passed it to Parasara and to Brihaspati. Parasara taught it to Maitreya, who taught it to Vidura as part of the expanded *Bhagavatam* he had overheard Krishna teach Uddhava at Prabhasa \(*BP* 3.8.7–9\). The panel thus completes the theme of revealed knowledge that began with Hayagriva at the northeast corner of the porch. Revelation includes Veda, Agama, and Purana; in the terms of the *Chandogya Upanishad*, it includes the Atharva-Angirasa mantras that reveal Vasudeva in the epics and puranas. But here we learn that the most complete and authoritative statement of Bhagavata Dharma is Samkarshana’s *Bhagavatam*, which contains much of the subject matter illustrated in the panels that lie ahead.

The panel reminds us that the Plower formation is the meaning of the entire north-facing sanctum wall, and that the Plower as a similarly inebriated snake sits behind the wall gazing outward through its central window. The Endless Ananta is Adishesha, “the primordial remainder” or “the first allowed to escape,” names that match Vasudeva’s infinite omniscient knowledge \(*jnana*\) in its first formation. His pleasant inebriation signifies Vasudeva’s voluntary delusion \(*tamas*\) of omniscience, which is necessary if a sense of “I” is to awaken within God to allow a perception of duality, the rise of passion, and the act of emanation. Inebriation allows the Knower of the Field to see double and plant the embryo in the Field. The embryo planted by the Plower is the consciousness of “I” in both God and people. In God’s case, the awareness of “I” is Brahma. When Brahma awakes in the presunrise hour, he faces northwest to receive knowledge as illustrated by Boar teaching Brahma, and the entire north-facing side illustrates the context of that teaching. When the sunrise of Brahma’s day begins, he faces northeast to begin his work of emanation. Brahma facing the rising sun is depicted in the panel that begins our discussion of the vimana’s east-facing side, in the next chapter.



## **Slit-opening Flanked by Pratiharas**

Between Panels N1 and N2 is a slit-opening flanked by two standing male and crowned figures \(*pratihara*\) in graceful postures of ease, each with two arms. Such slit-openings appear regularly on the vimana with similar portrayals, and we may pause to consider this one as representative of the others.

The standing male on the east holds his right hand on his hip and a flower stem in his left hand; its closed blossom stands erect. The male figure on the west mirrors that posture with his left hand on his hip and a a closed blossom standing in his right hand \(Figure 13.3\). The closed blossoms standing up point us to Krishna’s instruction to Uddhava about the yogic practice of visualization \(*dhyana*\) through breath control \(*prayanama*\) and specifically to the syllable Ora \(*BP* 11.14.31–46\).




FIGURE 13.3. Panel N2: Naranarayana and Narada in the region of Bharata \(adjacent to a dvarapala\). Photo by Sathya Seelan.


In yogic praxis, Krishna said, the sound *Om* is to emanate up the subtle body from its base \(*muladhara*\) at the bottom of the spine; its rising emanation is like a fine thread of a lotus stalk and the continual ringing of a bell. Through breath control *Om* is to be brought to the lotus of the heart \(*hridaya*\), which droops on its stalk with its tip down. Through yoga practice three times a day at the samdhya “junctions” \(sunrise, noon, sunset\), the sadhaka gains control over the breath and eventually may cause the heart-lotus to stand up and bloom.

Once that is achieved, Krishna continued, the sadhaka is to visualize the sun, moon, and fire vertically arranged in the pericarp of the heart-lotus, and Krishna with four arms in its midst. Concentrated focus on parts of Krishna’s body in that fire will lead the sadhaka to see all things in the Self and the Self in all things. The erect yet closed flowers held in the hands of the two males flanking this slit-opening \(and repeated elsewhere on the vimana\) suggest a moment in that yogic praxis; the sadhaka is ready for a consecration that will open the lotus blossom and enable him or her to see Krishna in its fire.



## ******The Four Bracketed Panels**

### ***Panel N2: Naranarayana and Narada in the Region of Bharata***

Narada venerating Naranarayana introduces the teachings of samkhya, yoga, and the Pancharatra Agama. According to the narrator Shuka, throughout our kalpa the Bhagavan flourishes on Bharata in an invisible form known as Naranarayana \(*BP* 5.19.9–15\). In this panel the name means “Narayana as Man,” but in a subsequent panel it means “Nara and Narayana.”3 Naranarayana performs tapas in order to bestow on self-controlled people the righteousness, omniscience, renunciation, sovereignty, tranquillity, and cessation that lead to apprehension of the Self \(*BP* 5.19.9\).

On Bharata, Shuka said, blessed \(*bhagavat*\) Narada resolved to instruct Savarni, the future Manu, in the Bhagavan’s teaching about himself in samkhya, yoga, and the Pancharatra Agama \(*BP* 5.19.10\).4 When Narada prayed to Narayana as Man he was with people of Bharata who followed the dharma of class and stage of life. Narayana may stand here as a man, but he is unaffected by his body and generates a similar detachment in others \(*BP* 5.19.1–15\).

Narada in the panel introduces a model of devotee that differs from the nonprocreative \(*nivritti*\) model of his brothers, the four Kumaras introduced in the previous chapter. Like them, Narada is free to travel anywhere in the three worlds of rebirth and even outside them, yet unlike them, his approach to God is appropriate to a person constantly plagued by passions such as greed and lust. In contrast to their instinctive yoga \(with its five restraints of yama and five disciplines of niyama\), Narada’s method is the yoga of devotion \(*bhaktiyoga*\) with eleven yama and twelve niyama \(*BP* 11.19.33–35\).5 Bhaktiyoga, a life of “service to the Bhagavan who bestows emancipation” \(*mukundaseva*\), is more relevant to people plagued by desire and greed \(*kamalobha*\) than the path of yoga \(*BP* 1.7.36\). By meditating on him, by offering all intended acts to him, and by singing of his deeds and attributes, Narada rides in a boat sure to cross death and birth. Whenever he sings of God, Narada feels him in his heart \(*BP* 1.6.33–36\).

Narada’s bhaktiyoga is to be practiced by people in Bharata who follow the varnashramadharma of social class and stage of life \(*BP* 5.19.9\). According to the *Satvata-samhita*, which Narada learned from the Plower, bhaktiyoga applies to women as well as men, to old and to young, and to the “clean” and the “unclean.” Agamic consecration removes “uncleanness” and qualifies the devotee to receive consecration into mantras, mandalas, visualizations, and icons.

As we saw in the discussion of the *Satvata-samhita* in chapter 8, the devotee first receives purification \(*saucha*\) from all sins through the “Man-lion Consecration” \(*Narasima-diksha*\) \(*Satvata-samhita* 17; Smith 1975: 526–532\). Once purified, he or she may then receive other consecrations. Most common, it seems, was the “Single-Yet-Many Consecration” \(*ekaneka-diksha*\). By following the sadhana of devotion that follows, he or she may attain either emancipation \(*kaivalya*\), or wordly enjoyment \(*bhoga*\), or both \(*Satvata-samhita* 16–23\). As we shall see in the discussion of the south-facing panels in chapter 15, the purifying “Man-lion Consecration” was administered not only to Shudras but also to untouchables and outcastes.

THE STORY. According to Shuka, Narada worships Narayana as Man \(Naranarayana\) on Bharata at this very moment and teaches Pancharatra, samkhya, and yoga to the future Manu named Savarni \(*BP* 5.19.10\). Samkhya originated with the seer Kapila, who is the subject of the next panel. Narada’s biography explains how he obtained that knowledge and became a singing bhaktiyogin \(BP 7.15.69–73\).

During the kalpa prior to our own, Narada had been a gandharva who loved women and song and drank too much. One day, surrounded by women and drunkenly singing love songs, he attended a sacrifice conducted by devas. They cursed him to be born deprived of beauty and power, in a low status appropriate to his behavior. He was therefore born as the son of a female servant of sages \(*muni*\) following the Doctrine of Veda \(Vedavada\).

Growing up in that context, Narada first heard of Krishna at age five. During a gathering of yogins during the four-month rain retreat, the five-year-old listened to them tell Krishna’s story \(*Krishnakatha*\) \(*BP* 1.5.23–31\). Through that hearing, devotion grew, and Narada developed the loving clinging \(*bhakti*\) that produces humble, reverent, and self-controlled behavior. Seeing those symptoms, the yogins let Narada eat their leftovers, which purified his mind. At the three samdhya “junctions” of every day \(sunrise, noon, sunset\) he listened to them discuss Krishna, and the attachment \(*bhakti*\) that developed destroyed his passion and delusion. At the end of the rains the yogins gave the five-year-old their most secret knowledge, which Vasudeva himself had revealed.6 It was the Pancharatra Agama with its doctrine of formations \(*vyuha*\) and the story of Krishna. Through it Narada came to understand the power of Vasudeva’s maya and became a refugee at Vasudeva’s feet.

Shuka told Parikshit that Narada learned how to use maya to transcend maya and how to get her on his side while experiencing death and birth \(*BP* 1.5.32–40\). When all one’s intended acts \(*karma*\) are dedicated to Vasudeva, maya works positively. Even while enveloped by delusion that causes one to think of oneself as an actor who acts, one can use the deluding shroud to break out of it through a mere act of devoted insight and will. Dedication of deluded action to Vasudeva acts like medicine on the delusion itself, healing the disease that causes the painful symptoms of death and birth.7 When performed in “unified consciousness during ritual performance” \(*kriyayoga*\), intended acts destroy themselves and a “unified consciousness clinging to Krishna” \(*bhaktiyoga*\) emerges.

Actions performed in bhaktiyoga keep the mind focused on Krishna’s qualities and names, which are evoked by venerating Vasudeva Krishna, his elder brother Samkarshana Balarama, his son Pradyumna, and his grandson Aniruddha, all avatars of the four formations. When performing intentional acts \(*karma*\), the bhaktiyogin utters the mantra, “Veneration to the exalted Lord Vasudeva, and veneration to Pradyumna, to Aniruddha, and to Samkarshana” and offers the acts to Krishna. Not only is Krishna those four avatars, he is also the one without material form \(*amurtika*\) in the material form of the mantra \(*mantramurti*\) addressed to them. Through such consecrated acts the devotee will come to see the Person of the Sacrifice \(*yajnapurusha*\) perfectly \(*BP* 1.5.32–38\). As discussed previously, the Person of the Sacrifice takes the forms of Horsehead and Boar.

Narada, now a bhaktiyogin, stayed with his mother until a snake bit her and she died. Then he wandered north and sat under a pipal tree. “By myself \(*atmana*\),” he recalled, “I meditated on that Self \(*atmanam*\) within myself \(*atmastham*\) as I had been taught” \(*BP* 1.6.16; also *BG* 6.5–32\). Hari eventually appeared in the consciousness in his heart \(*hridaya*\); lost in joy, perception of “two” \(*ubhaya*\) disappeared and he entered the enstatic consciousness of samadhi \(*BP* 1.6.17–18\)

When Hari’s form disappeared, samadhi ended. Nevertheless, through a bodiless voice Hari told Narada that such a vision will come again in another life, that he will never lose his memory of it whichever kalpa he is born into, and that he will become his personal attendant. As a bhaktiyogin focused on Krishna, Narada wandered and waited for death. At the end of that kalpa he was absorbed along with everything else. In this kalpa Narada was born through Brahma’s lap, as befits his sensually passionate nature \(*BP* 3.12.24\).8 He was Brahma’s tenth son. The former Shudra was now a Brahmin and among his older brothers were the four Kumaras.

Narada lives in this kalpa firm in the practice of continence. He possesses a vina to accompany his singing and the ability to go anywhere he wishes unobstructed \(*BP* 1.6.1–38, esp. 32–33\). But he wanders ceaselessly, through all the worlds of Brahma’s body and all the manvantaras of Brahma’s daytime, because Daksha cursed Narada after he had persuaded Daksha’s thousands of sons to renounce the world before they had begot progeny \(*BP* 6.5, esp. 6.5.43\).

In our manvantara, for example, at the end of the Dvapara Yuga prior to our own Kali Yuga, Narada appeared to Vyasa sitting alone on the banks of the Sarasvati River. Vyasa the Compiler had edited and divided Veda in preparation for the degeneration that Time inevitably brings to Bharata. He had also composed “for women, Shudras, and degenerates” a form of Veda they may hear, which is the *Mahabharata*. Vyasa was nevertheless dissatisfied. In his solitude on the river he sensed that he had not given due attention to the Bhagavata Dharma, which paramahamsa ascetics and the Immovable himself find dear. Narada appeared to him and confirmed his suspicion \(*BP* 1.4.14–33\).

Narada told Vyasa that he had not adequately described the Bhagavan’s pure glory in the *Mahabharata* and that “any vision \(*darshana*\) that is incomplete does not please the Bhagavan.” Vyasa had indeed expounded Veda and the four aims of human life \(*purushartha*\) exhaustively, but not Vasudeva’s greatness. Literary works without Vasudeva’s glory, Narada said, are to “supreme goose” \(*paramahamsa*\) ascetics merely mud puddles in which crows bathe. He told Vaysa to enter samadhi and recall the various acts of the wide-striding Lord, and to record them so that people may attain freedom from bondage \(*BP* 1.5.13\). “That will compensate for the mistake you made in the four newly divided Vedas when you described Vedic rites motivated by desire as Dharma, a sure trap for the ignorant.”

Vyasa followed Narada’s advice and used disciplined attachment to Krishna \(*bhaktiyoga*\) to unify his consciousness in samadhi and saw the Person and his maya in full. Out of that vision he composed the *Satvata-samhita* we know as the *Bhagavata Purana* \(*BP* 1.7.6\). Listening to it will develop “loving attachment to the Dark One who is the Supreme Person,” and will dispel all griefs, infatuations, and fears \(*BP* 1.7.1–8\). Vyasa revised the text carefully and taught it to his son Shuka. When Shuka taught it to the emperor Parikshit at his deathbed, the charioteer and bard \(*shuta*\) named Romaharshana heard it and later taught it to Saunaka and other seers at a thousand-year sacrifice in the Naimisa Forest. Shuta’s version of the *Bhagavata Purana* is the one we know, but it is a highly expanded version of the original.9

The story of Narada’s life in the previous kalpa as the son of a servant \(Shudra\) and his birth in this one as a son of Brahma \(Brahmin\) leads us to a Pancharatra text known as the *Satvata-samhita*. It is different from the *Satvata-samhita* that is the *Bhagavata Purana* recovered by Vyasa, and is also called the *Satvata-shastra* \(Smith 1975: 514–536\). As discussed in the previous chapter, the *Satvata-samhita* is included in the teachings of Fish to the Pandya king Satyavrata during the deluge after the previous kalpa; there it is called “the sankhya, yoga, and kriya of the divine *Purana-samhita*” \(*BP* 8.24.55\). The Pandyan Satyavrata was reborn in this kalpa through Surya the Sun as the now ruling Vaivasvata Manu named Shraddhadeva.

The *Satvata-samhita* begins by explaining how its teaching appeared in the Dravida region ruled by the Pandyas of Madurai. Vasudeva had taught it to Samkarshana in the Treta Yuga of the present kalpa, and he then passed it directly on to Narada. At the urging of Parashurama \(Rama with the Axe\) dwelling in the Malaya mountains \(now called the Western Ghats, which divide Kerala from Tamilnadu\), Narada taught the scripture to seers living in the region. Parashurama’s connection to the story is significant, for his own story illustrates sadhanas that lead to enlightenment. Moreover, that origin story matches historical evidence of the Pancharatra Agama in Pandya and Chera courts in the early centuries CE \(Hudson 1994\).10 The *Satvata-samhita* is important to the design and the rites of this Vishnu-house and a brief outline of it now will be useful later.

Narada discussed six topics in the *Satvata-samhita*. After the origin story in chapter 1, he discussed the rules priests are to follow in puja to the icon of Vasudeva, or in the homa, when either is performed both for their own benefit \(*svarthapuja*\) and for the benefit of others \(*pararthapuja*\).11 Fundamentally, that puja is the worship of the four formations as the manifestation of the One. That discussion constitutes chapters 2–6. Narada then discussed ascetic vows \(*vrata*\) that are addressed to the formations; the devotees may follow them according to their class and caste. That constitutes chapters 7–8. In chapters 9–13 Narada described the way mantras are to be used in the worship the avataras \(*vibhavadevata*\). It includes internal mental worship or external physical worship by means of the wheel-shaped mandala \(*chakramandala*\), or by means of a fire, or of water held in cupped hands. He described the way to construct mandalas, the way to fill them with Vasudeva’s many forms, and the way to visualize those forms while reciting mantras. He then, in chapters 14 and 15, discussed the rites needed to purify oneself of sin at the end of the liturgical year.

Narada’s final teachings directly relate to this Vishnu-house. In chapters 16–23 he began with the “Man-lion Consecration” \(*Narasimha-diksha*\), which purifies male and female devotees from all four classes who desire initiation into the puja they will perform only for their own benefit \(*svarthapuja*\). His discussion continues with the ceremonies of the “Single-Yet-Many Initiation” \(*ekaneka-diksha*\), the way of life \(*sadhana*\) that follows from it, and the way the consecrated devotee is to compose mantras for worship. In the final chapters 24 and 25, Narada discusses the context of worship: how temples are to be built and how they and the icon dwelling within them are to be consecrated.

THE PANEL. The rishi Naranarayana is a large royally dressed figure with a tall crown and two pairs of arms standing on the eastern side \(Figure 13.3\). He faces directly forward and looks slightly downward. His back pair of hands, not clearly visible, holds the discus and conch. His front right hand rests on his lower hip, and his left hand at the level of his chest forms a mudra too badly damaged to identify. The smaller figure of the rishi Narada, with one pair of arms and piled hair reaching to the Bhagavan’s left shoulder, stands on the western side and gazes slightly upward. He holds the neck of his vina with his right hand and its round bottom with his left hand. Above him at the level of Naranarayana’s face and crown are two faces gazing at this scene. One may be Narada’s disciple Savarni, who will be the Manu of the next Manu Term. The other may represent the inhabitants of Bharata who follow the *vamashra-madharma*.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. First, the panel represents the region of Bharata on the Jambu continent, and its depiction of Narada in the presence of Naranarayana on Bharata introduces the yoga of devotion \(*bhaktiyoga*\) with eleven restraints \(*yama*\) and twelve disciplines \(*niyama*\) \(*BP* 11.19.33–35\). Bhaktiyoga as a life of “service to the Bhagavan Who Bestows Emancipation” \(*mukundaseva*\) is more relevant to people plagued by desire and greed than is the path of yoga alone \(*BP* 1.7.36\). It also portrays Narada as the ideal bhaktiyogin. By meditating on Vasudeva Krishna, by offering all intended acts to him, and by singing of his deeds and attributes, Narada rides in a boat sure to cross death and birth. Whenever Narada sings of God he feels him in his heart \(*BP* 1.6.33–36\).

Moreover, the panel signifies Narada’s teaching of Bhagavata Dharma, which includes the following: 1\) the story of Krishna or Krishnakatha; 2\) the “most secret knowledge” or *jnana guhyatama*, which contains a mantra addressed to Vasudeva and his three vyuha formations during a sacrifice to the Person of Sacrifice \(*BP* 1.5.23–38\); 3\) the *Pancharatra Upanishad*, which he learns from Narayana on White Island \(*MBh* Shanti parvan 326; Ganguli 10: 132–142\); 4\) the *Satvata-samhita* \(*SS*\), which he learns from Samkarshana after Vasudeva has taught it to him \(*SS* 1; 5\) the *Jayakhya-samhita*, which he learns directly from the Bhagavan and then teaches to his disciple Shandilya \(*JS* 1–2\); and 6\) the stanzas he and Tumburu sing in Brahma’s presence about Ananta’s material form of pure sattva holding the brahmanda as a minute particle on one of his thousands of hoods \(*BP* 5.25.8–13\). But Narada’s disciple Savarni further connects him to 7\) the *Devi Mahatmyam* as taught by the rishi Markandeya depicted ahead in Panel N5, and to 8\) “The Ancient Collection” or *Purana-samhita*, which the Bhagavan in the shape of Matsya the Fish teaches to the Pandya king named Satyavrata during the deluge between this and the previous kalpa \(*BP* 8.24\). In this kalpa Satyavrata rules as the seventh Manu named Shraddhadeva, the son of Surya or Vaivasvata. His younger brother is Savarni, the disciple of Narada, who will succeed his elder brother as the eighth Manu \(for Savarni’s story, see *BP* 5.19.10; 8.1.19–22; and *DM* 1.1–46; 13.5–17\).



## ***Panel N3: Hari Announces Kapila’s Birth to Kardama***

In our discussion of the previous panel, we noted that Hari is one of the four material forms \(*murti*\) that the Knower-of-the-Field gave birth to through the womb of Matter. The others are the guru Narayana, the disciple Nara, and dark-skinned Vyasa born on an island \(*Krisnadvaipayana*\). Hari is Vishnu, the actor who measures out, pervades, and sustains the realm of spacetime. But like Samkarshana, Balarama, and the residents of White Island in the Ocean of Milk, here he is not dark but white skinned, for his color matches the purity \(*sattva*\) of the Plower formation and the Krita Yuga.

The panel is about the seer Kapila, a portion of Hari born to restore knowledge of the Self taught in samkhya \(*BP* 3.24.36\). Hari’s portion appeared as Kapila through Kardama, the lord of progeny \(*prajapati*\) born from Brahma’s shadow. The scene depicted here is the vision of himself Hari gave to Kardama when Kardama asked for a wife. His subsequent marriage to Devahuti was the first of all marriages \(*BP* 3.22.15; Tapasyananda 1980–1982 1.242\).

THE STORY. Like his brother Daksha, Kardama had been ordered by his father Brahma to procreate. He went to the Bindusaras ashram on the Sarasvati River, where a tear from the Bhagavan’s compassion had fallen to form a lake \(*BP* 3.21.38\). He performed tapas there for ten thousand years, serving Hari who gives boons to refugees clinging to him \(*bhakti*\) while yoked to enstasy \(*samadhiyukta*\) and disciplined in rites \(*kriyayoga*\) \(*BP* 3.21.7\). Hari was pleased and revealed himself there as white with white emblems \(*BP* 3.24.1; Tagare 1976–1979 1: 353\); in Tapasyananada’s translation \(1980–1982 1: 236–237\): “Pure and sun-like in brilliance; wearing garlands with white and blue flowers; having blue and curly locks surrounding His forehead; wearing a yellow cloth; having a diadem and ear-rings; holding in his hands a conch, a discus, a mace, and a white play-lotus; having an expression and a smile on the face that bestow the highest joy on an onlooker; seated on the back of Garuda; having Sri on His chest and Kautstubha on His neck” \(*BP* 3.21.9–12\).

Kardama responded with a prayer asking for a wife with whom he could beget children \(*BP* 3.21.13–21\). Hari promised that two days later, the ruling Manu Svayambhuva and his wife Satarupa would come with their daughter Devahuti looking for a husband. They would give her to him as wife, and she would bear nine daughters who would marry other seers and have children. And, Hari concluded, “I, in a portion of myself, will be born of you and will compose a text on metaphysics \(*tattva-samhita*\)” \(*BP* 3.21.32\). The white Hari sitting on Garuda then disappeared.

Two days later, Svayambhuva Manu and his wife arrived with their daughter Devahuti. They offered her to Kardama. She, a Kshatriya, and he, a Brahmin, were members of the two classes who protect each other and through whom Hari protects the whole social order \(*BP* 3.22.3–4\). Kardama accepted her as his bride on the condition that after a child had been born, he would renounce the world and become a paramahamsa renunciant. They agreed. After the wedding, Svayambhuva and his wife returned to their capital \(*BP* 3.22.21–39\). Devahuti then served Kardama with such self-denying devotion that he gave her the gift of insight \(*drishti*\) even though they had not yet consummated their marriage \(*BP* 3.23\). But Devahuti, now knowing that her husband was pleased with her, asked Kardama to give her the sexual pleasure that would impregnate her with a child, and Kardama agreed. But as the ideal lover should, he made preparations for an elaborate honeymoon.

Kardama used his yogic power to create a multistoried and luxurious palace \(*vimana*\) that would travel anywhere they wanted. Accompanied by vidyadharis, the couple flew to the caverns of great Mount Meru, where a friend of Desire blows as a cool breeze. Kardama and Devehuta played and visited there and in other regions around Meru and then went on a tour of the whole earth. Finally, they returned to the ashram for their first sexual union. The couple lay down on the bed inside the vimana and Kardama divided himself into nine forms. For a hundred years they played and embraced, until the ninefold Kardama finally emitted his seed into her. Devahuti gave birth to nine daughters that same day.

Kardama now wanted to renounce and wander, but Devahuti asked him for a son too. “To get a son,” he said, “you should worship the supreme Person with faith,” and she did \(*BP* 3.24\). Through Kardama’s seed a portion of Hari passed into her womb and became Kapila. Brahma and various seers visited the ashram and were pleased to find that Kardama had fulfilled his command to procreate. Following Brahma’s instructions, Kardama married his nine daughters to various seers, and all nine then went with their husbands to their respective ashrams \(*BP* 3.24.22–25\). Again ready to renounce, Kardama asked his son Kapila for permission, which he gave. Kardama left, and true to the meaning of “Vasudeva,” eventually attained the vision of God in all things and of all things in God.

In the meantime, Kapila sat in the ashram without acting, and his mother Devahuti approached him for instruction \(*BP* 3.25\). “I take refuge in you,” she said to her son, “because for refugees you are the axe that cuts the tree of samsara.12 I want to know the nature of matter and soul from you, the greatest among those who know true Dharma” \(*BP* 3.25.11\). Kapila agreed to teach his mother the yoga that he had earlier taught to seers:

Mental consciousness \(*cheta*\) is the cause of bondage and the cause of liberation. When free from defilements like desire and greed created by the sense of “I” and “mine,” it becomes pure and is beyond sorrow and happiness. Then, by means of the discipline of knowledge, renunciation, and devotion, and by itself, the soul sees the isolated Self \(*atmana kevala*\) beyond matter—endless, self-luminous, subtle, indivisible, and uninvolved—and sees matter as powerless to bind it. Other than the discipline of clinging \(*bhakti*\) to the Bhagavan of all Selves, there is for yogins no auspicious path to the attainment of brahman.

The wise say that attachment is the noose of the Self. But that same attachment is the door to emancipation when it is attachment to holy people. Such holy people have no attachments except to me, and attachment to them destroys all sins of attachment.

Holy people always discuss my stories, and by listening to them, you will develop faith \(*shraddha*\), delight \(*rati*\), and clinging \(*bhakti*\). Then, because of clinging, disgust with the world will arise and you will seek to control thought \(*chitta*\) through the discipine of yoga, and you will follow the easy path of bhaktiyoga. By not enjoying the threads of matter, by developing knowledge through renunciation, and by generating clinging through a unified consciousness focused on me, you, the devotee, will attain me even here in this world. \(*BP* 3.25.13–27\)

Devahuti then asked her son, “Since I am a woman of slow understanding, please explain to me the nature of devotion suited to me. How may I attain nirvana easily? You are the embodiment of nirvana, what is the yoga that reaches the Bhagavan like an arrow?” \(*BP* 3.25.28–30\).

Out of love for her through whom he had appeared, Kapila began to teach Devahuti the categories of samkhya and the extensive bhaktiyoga. It was a long teaching and occupies eight chapters in Book Three of the *Bhagavata Purana* \(3.25–33\). He described a religious ideal developed further by Krishna in his lecture to Uddhava illustrated ahead by Panel S2. Kapila defined clinging or devotion \(*bhakti*\) as the disposition generated in Bhagavatas when the powers \(*deva*\) of the subtle body \(*gunalinga*\) and the gross body engaged in Vedic acts \(*anusravika-karma*\) are unified in a mind \(*manas*\) that is like sattva. That clinging consciousness burns up the sheath of ignorance \(*BP* 3.25.32–33\).13

When Kapila had finished his long instruction, Devahuti circumambulated him, prostrated, and praised him with wonder at the mystery: “How was it that he who stretches out on the waters and gives birth to Brahma in his lotus-navel was born in my womb? How was it that he who holds the universe in his stomach at the beginning, and appears as a baby sucking his toe on a banyan leaf floating on the waters at the end, was carried by me in my stomach too?” \(*BP* 3.33.1–4\).14 Kapila told her to practice the easy path he had taught, for it leads one beyond samsara. With her permission, he left the ashram and walked toward the northeast, where Ocean \(Samudra\) eventually gave him a place where he could stay and enter samadhi \(*BP* 3–33–33—35\).

In the meantime, Devahuti practiced tapas at the ashram as her son had taught her \(*BP* 3.33.12–32\). Her grief at his departure made her think of him constantly, but since he was the Bhagavan, that grief set her mind free from any other attachment. She practiced the inner vision Kapila had taught, and an unbroken flow of love developed and led her into continous samadhi. She lost all sense of her body, but others at the ashram kept her alive by feeding her. So absorbed was she in God, and so given to tapas and yoga, that her hair was disheveled and her clothes blew off, and she did not notice that only her previous karma \(*daiva*\) now protected her. Through extinguishing in *brahman* \(*brahmanirvana*\) she attained the supreme Self \(*BP* 3.33.30\). The place of her success \(*siddhi*\) became famous as the Realm of Success \(Siddhapada\), and her body became a river that bestows success \(*siddhi*\) on the successful \(*siddha*\).

Subsequently, the seer Kapila, who was sitting quite still in the northeast, became involved in the dramatic story of Ganga’s descent onto the mountains and plains of Bharata. Her descent was part of the later history of the Solar Dynasty of Ayodhya \(*BP* 9.8\).

Once, Shuka told Parikshit, King Sagara ruled at Ayodhya. He had defeated the Talajanghas, Yavanas, Shakas, Haihayas, and Barbaras but did not slay them. Instead, he had them wear the peculiar modes of dress and tonsure by which they were known \(as barbarians in the northwest by the second century BCE\).15 He then performed a horse sacrifice, during which Indra stole the wandering horse and hid it. Sagara sent his sons by his primary wife Sumati to find it. After they had dug all around looking for the horse, they finally saw it in the northeast, standing next to Kapila sitting in samadhi. Thinking him to be the horse thief who was only pretending, they raised their weapons to kill him, but instantly all burned up by a fire that emerged from their own bodies. Shuka then paused to comment on other tellings of the story—as found, for example, in the *Mahabharata* \(3.94–108 in the critical edition\) and in the Valmiki *Ramayana* \(1.37–43\): “The belief that Kapila’s anger burned them up is wrong, for how can you attribute deluded anger to a person who is the abode of purity and whose Self purifies the moving universe? How can the sage who taught sankhya and is the Supreme Self see a difference between friend and foe?” \(*BP* 9.8.1\). We shall return to that “correction” later.

Sagara the king then sent the sons of his secondary wife Keshini to fetch the horse. Among those sons was Asamanjasa, who had been a great yogin in a previous birth and knew it. In order to avoid the attachment that had condemned him to rebirth in this life, he behaved insanely to create revulsion toward him in others. His father finally renounced him when he threw children into the Sarayu River to drown. Asamanjasa then brought the children back to life by the power \(*bala*\) derived from the sovereignty of his unified consciousness \(*yoga-ishvarya*\) and left for the forest. His son Amshuman went to look for the horse.

Amshuman traveled through the ditch that his father’s half-brothers had dug and eventually found the horse standing near the heap of ash that had been his uncles \(*BP* 9.8.20–31\). Kapila was still sitting there. Amshuman bowed to Kapila with folded hands, adored him, and prayed to him as the Self of all beings who in order to teach has assumed a human form through maya. Kapila mentally blessed Amshuman and gave him permission to take the consecrated horse back to his grandfather. “But,” he said, “these ashes of your uncles need to be purified and that can be done only by the waters of Ganga.” Amshuman circumambulated the muni, prostrated, and returned with the horse to Sagara and helped him complete the sacrifice. At his end, Sagara turned his rule over to Amshuman, followed the instructions of his teacher Aurva, and attained liberation.

It was Amshuman’s grandson, Bhagiratha, who finally purified the ancestral ash with Ganga’s water \(*BP* 9.9.1–15\). He performed great tapas with Ganga in mind, and she appeared and offered him a boon. He wanted her to purify his ancestors, he said, but she asked, “Who will bear my impact as I flow down to earth so I will not go all the way down to the realm of Taste \(Rasatala\)? Also, people will clean themselves of pollution in me; how will I become clean?” Bhagiratha replied: “Holy people \(*sadhu*\) who have renounced and are pacified and are established in *brahman* purify the world—they will destroy that pollution through the contact of their bodies, because Hari who destroys pollution dwells in them. Rudra is the Self of the body \(*atman sharirin*\) in whom the warp and woof of this universe is woven like cloth in its threads and it will bear your impact” \(*BP* 9.9.6–7\).

Bhagiratha then performed tapas to win Rudra Shiva’s agreement \(*BP* 9.9.8–15\). Before long, Ganga, who was purified by the feet of Hari, flowed onto the head of Shiva and down to earth. Moving in his chariot like the wind, Bhagiratha led her to the ash heap of his ancestors, and as soon as Ganga touched it, Sagara’s sons attained heaven. “How much more,” Shuka then rhetorically asked Parikshit, “will that goddess \(*devi*\) give those who have faith \(*sraddha*\) and serve her with fixed vows?”

Rudra Shiva in the story illustrates his function as the directional deva \(*digdevata*\) of the northeast, where Kapila sits \(*BP* 6.13.14 and 17–21\) and near which this panel is located. The Pallavas, whose clan deity \(*kuladeva*\) was Shiva, claimed to purify earth through their rule in the way Ganga purified earth through her descent \(Huntington 1985: 642 n 9\). The story evokes the enormous rock-cut relief at Mamallapuram carved by Pallavas in the seventh century, which some have interpreted as depicting, among other things, the descent of Ganga \(Huntington 1985: 303–304 and 642, nn 16–19\).

Elements in Kapila’s teachings are noteworthy. In the context of the Bhagavan as the indwelling Self of all beings who is the refuge beyond Time, Kapila described him as having faces in all directions. That matches the image of the Ordainer with four faces on Lokaloka portrayed in Panel W2, Figure 11.6\), and evokes Arjuna’s vision of Krishna in his highest form of sovereignty in *Bhagavad-gita* 11, where Vishnu as Time had faces in every direction \(*BG* 11.11 and 32\).

The connection of Kapila’s teaching to the *Bhagavad-gita* is evident when it is read in the light of Krishna’s long “Summary of the Brahman Doctrine” \(*BP* 11.7–29\) illustrated on the south side \(Panel S2\). Both teachings appear to explain the *Bhagavad-gita* within the context of temple worship. Kapila, for example, described the practice of inner vision \(*dhyana*\) at length \(*BP* 3.28\) and discussed the use of icons \(*archa*\) in worship; icons are necessary, he said, until the devotee knows God in the heart \(*hridi*\) and in all beings \(*BP* 3.29, esp. 3.29.25\).

Finally, let us consider Shuka’s “correction” of the story. Aside from it, his telling matches those in the *Mahabharata* and in Valmiki’s *Ramanaya*, which Kampar later developed into the Tamil *Ramayana* \(1.9.33–61\), and in the *Shiva Purana* \(*Uma-samhita* 38\). In those tellings it was Kapila’s anger that burned up the sons of Sagara. Shuka said that was incorrect, because Kapila could not have burned up Sagara’s sons by his own anger since he was undefiled sattva. Because anger derives from passion and delusion, they must have burned up from their own passion and delusion, and Kapila merely provided the occasion. That “correction,” along with the presumed dating of the “barbarians” to the second century BCE, reveals this Sagara episode to be an addition to Book Nine of the *Bhagavata Purana*.

THE PANEL. This badly stained panel depicts Hari’s appearance to Kardama to announce the birth of a part of Himself as the rishi Kapila \(Figure 13.4\). Hari with two pairs of arms sits on the shoulders of Garuda. Both turn slightly eastward and tilt their tall crowns westward. Hari’s back pair of hands holds the wheel and conch. His front left hand turns inward to his left breast, perhaps forming the padmanidhimudra signifying the lotus treasure: the left hand faces toward the right, the little finger stands up, the remaining fingers curl, and the tips of the forefinger and thumb touch \(*PS* 1974: 24\). His front right forearm is broken off, but appears to have stretched out toward the viewer, perhaps to hold a mace; its elbow rests on the inside of his right knee with his right foot on Garuda’s right shoulder. His left leg hangs over Garuda’s left shoulder and Garuda supports its foot with his left palm. A rope of three strands hangs from Hari’s left shoulder across his chest and under his right arm.




FIGURE 13.4. Panel N3: Hari announces Kapila’s birth to Kardama. Photo by Sathya Seelan.


Garuda has a human form with one pair of arms. His left hand holds his master’s foot at the level of his waist, and his right arm bends upward to support Hari’s right knee. Garuda’s legs reveal that he is flying: His left leg stretches back to the west and his raised right knee points eastward. A thick rope hangs from his left shoulder across his chest and under his right arm. Three strands of what appear to be beads hang around his neck.

At the top of the panel are two damaged figures who face the viewer. The one on the east is destroyed. The one on the west, directly above Hari, raises his right hand up in a gesture of praise. His left hand at his chest forms what appears to be the tattvamudra: the palm faces the viewer, the tips of the forefinger and thumb touch, and the other fingers are relaxed \(*PS* 1954: 72\). At the bottom of the panel sit the four Kumaras with piles of matted hair. One Kumara sits on the bottom end of the vertical axis formed by Hari and Garuda, and raises his broken right hand up toward Hari in praise as his left hand rests on his hip. A second Kumara sits west of him, apparently forming the anjalimudra with his damaged hands. A third Kumara sits to the east in a posture mirroring the middle Kumara. The fourth Kumara stands behind him, hidden in the darkness.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. The panel introduces the rishi Kapila as a part \(*kala*\) of the Bhagavan, and it represents his elaborate teachings of samkhya and yoga according to the bhaktiyoga of *Bhagavata Dharma* \(*BP* 3.25–33\). It also signifies an ideal concept of marriage for Bhagavatas: Sexual pleasure between husband and wife is celebrated, but as the means for propagation. Otherwise it is an obstacle to bhaktiyoga. Finally, it alludes to the appearance on Bharata of the Ganga River, which is the paradigm for all material means of purification, and implies the purifying bath that begins the day.



## **Slit Opening to the Samkarshana Formation**

Sculpted lions appear throughout the Vishnu-house and signify Shakti’s presence as Slayer of the Buffalo Asura \(Mahishasuramardini\). Originally, we may assume, they had been infused with mantras embodying tejas to protect the Vishnu-house. Standing up on their hind legs on either side of this opening through which the Plower formation gazes \(Figures 13.4, 13.5\), their tejas would have deflected any demons attracted to site. The same pattern is repeated at slit openings for the formations on the east and south. At this one, however, female figures stand behind the lions on either side; male figures stand at the others. The females suggest the generative nature of Vasudeva’s self-imposed inebriation in this first formation \(Figure 13.4\), and the males suggest the sovereignty and invincibility of the two formations that follow.




FIGURE 13.5. Panel N4: Hari teaches Brahma the supreme secret of omniscience. Photo by Sathya Seelan.




### ***Panel N4: Hari Teaches Brahma the Supreme Secret of Omniscience***

In this panel, Brahma receives instruction from Hari as Lord of Vaikuntha after he had received the vision illustrated in the first north-facing panel \(Figure 13.1\). Hari appeared enthroned, and tears flowed from Brahma’s eyes, his body hairs stood on end, and he prostrated \(*BP* 2.9.17–29\). As a friend does to a friend, Hari took Brahma’s hand and lifted him up to stand near him and talk, as illustrated here \(*BP* 2.9.18 and 29\).

THE STORY. Hari was pleased with Brahma’s tapas, he said, because it is by tapas that he himself creates the universe, eats it, and sustains it. “Fierce tapas is my virya” \(*BP* 2.9.23\). He offered Brahma a boon, and Brahma asked for knowledge: “How may I understand the bodiless Bhagavan in forms both subtle and gross? How may I know how to carry out the task of emanating the universe? How may I not fall into the delusion that it is I, rather than the Bhagavan, who is One unborn?” Because Brahma awoke seemingly out of nowhere, he and others might think he was the primordial One from which all emanates. Indeed, according to Greg Bailey, many Brahma temples existed from ca. 400 BCE to 400 CE, and many must have believed Brahma to be the One. Today only one Brahma temple remains in worship, at Pushkar near Ajmer \(Bailey 1983; Hudson 1986\).

Hari responded to Brahma’s request by teaching him the supreme secret of omniscience \(*BP* 2.9.30–36\). That doctrine, contained in four stanzas \(*BP* 2.9.32–35\), came to be known as the “*Bhagavatam* of Four Stanzas” \(*Catuhshloki Bhagavatam*\) \(Tagare 1976–1979 1: 208 n\). Stanza one teaches that the Bhagavan is all that exists before the universe appears, all that exists during its appearance, and all that exists after it disappears. Stanza two teaches that maya causes the universe to appear and hides the existing Self. Stanza three teaches that the Bhagavan transforms himself into all things, yet exists beyond them and is untouched by them. Stanza four teaches that the Self \(*atman*\) is the category \(*tattva*\) that persists through all those transformations and changes, yet suffers no diminution by them. That Self is what is to be known.

Hari told Brahma, “If you follow this teaching through all kalpas and yugas with supreme enstatic consciousness \(*parama samadhi*\), you will never be infatuated.” Then he disappeared. Brahma saluted him with joined hands and began to emit all beings, just as he had in previous kalpas \(*BP* 2.9.37–38\).

Brahma’s son Narada once came to him to learn about the maya of the Lord of Maya, and Brahma taught him the “ancient *Bhagavatam*” \(*Bhagavatam puranam*\) Hari had taught him \(*BP* 2.9.39–45\). But as a good teacher, Brahma turned those four terse stanzas into ten topics \(*lakshana*\) \(*BP* 2.9.43\): 1\) the emanation of Brahma \(*sarga*\); 2\) Brahma’s emanation of the universe \(*visarga*\); 3\) maintenance of order \(*sthana*\); 4\) protection of refugees \(*poshana*\); 5\) reigns of righteous living \(*manvantara*\); 6\) the latent aspects of karma \(*uti*\); 7\) stories of Hari’s avatars and devotees \(*ishakatha*\); 8\) withdrawal of the Self and its potencies \(*shakti*\) when the Bhagavan reclines \(*nirodha*\); 9\) the Self’s abandonment of other shapes \(*rupa*\) for its own shape \(*svarupa*\) in emancipation from samsara \(*mukti*\); and 10\) the originator of emanation and dissolution known as the supreme *brahman* \(*parambrahma*\) and supreme Self \(*paramatma*\) and place of refuge \(*ashraya*\) \(*BP* 2.10.1–9\). Narada later passed that ancient *Bhagavatam* on to Vyasa, Vyasa passed it on to Shuka, and Shuka passed it on to the emperor Parikshit just before he died from snake bite \(*BP* 12.13.18–23\).

When Shuka explained the *Bhagavatam’s* ten topics as Brahma had listed them \(*BP* 2.10.1–9\), he made an important hermeneutical point: By using shruti and artha, insightful sages \(*mahatman*\) explained the tenth topic—place of refuge \(*ashraya*\)—by means of the first nine. But what did Shuka mean by shruti and artha? Goswami translated *shruti* as the actual words of the text and *artha* as their purport \(Goswami 1995 1: 125\). Tapasyananda, however, translated *shruti* as the various hymns that describe the Bhagavan directly, and *artha* as the purport of the narratives that describe him indirectly \(Tapasyanana 1980–1982 1: 134\).16 Tapasyananda’s interpretation matches the way the *Bhagavata Purana* works in relation to the Vishnu-house: Direct description of Vasudeva’s forms is found in its prayers, but the “formless” Bhagavan is the indirect meaning of all its many and complex narratives \(*BP* 2.10.1–2\).

Various teachers expanded the terse *“Bhagavatam* of Four Stanzas” for the sake of the student being taught. Samkarshana meditating on Vasudeva, for example, taught the *Bhagavatam* to Sanatkumara \(*BP* 3.8–4.31\) as represented by the final panel on this wall, and that teaching already had a long history. When Krishna taught Uddhava the *Bhagavatam*, he said he had taught it to Brahma in the lotus during “my primordial emanation” \(*BP* 3.4.13\), which identifies it as the *“Bhagavatam* of Four Stanzas.” Yet when Krishna taught it to Uddhava while Maitreya listened, it was much longer; and when Maitreya later taught Vidura what he had overheard, he added three chapters on cosmogony to it \(*BP* 3.5–7\). By now the four-stanza *Bhagavatam* filled up almost all of Books Three and Four of the *Bhagavata Purana* \(*BP* 3.5–4.31\), and most of it is what Samkarshana taught to Sanatkumara.

Moreover, the *Bhagavatam* correlates with another scripture. Books Three and Four of the *Bhagavata Purana* spell out the implicit meaning of the *“Bhagavatam* of Four Stanzas” taught to Brahma in the lotus, which means they constitute a fully blossomed “Text of the Lotus” \(*Padma-samhita*\). Not surprisingly, that *Padma-samhita* correlates with the liturgies in the Pancharatra book called the *Padma-samhita*. Pancharatra liturgies and Bhagavata lore emerge from the same primordial lotus in which Brahma had been instructed at the kalpa’s beginning. To make that origin explicit, the narrating Shuka was Brahma embodied \(*BP* 12.13.21\). Shuka’s lengthy teaching of the *Bhagavatam* to the emperor Parikshit is therefore an authoritative expansion of the original *“Bhagavatam* of Four Stanzas” into the huge and complex, yet consistent, scripture illustrated by the Vishnu-house.

The Vishnu-house itself constitutes another expansive telling of the four-stanza *Bhagavatam*, but visually in three dimensions. Through their complex vision of the building as a book, its designers played skillfully with themes and allusions that move across, around, and up and down the Vishnu-house, just as they echo back and forth within the scripture. This north-facing panel, for example, contains allusions to two south-facing panels directly opposite. Hari standing here to teach Brahma parallels Krishna standing there to teach Uddhava \(Panel S2\), and Dattatreya standing there to teach King Yadu \(Panel S3\). Krishna teaches Uddhava the “Summary of the *Brahman* Doctrine,” which elaborates the “supreme secret” taught here and in the *Bhagavad-gita;* the latter is another example of a teacher standing to teach his student. Dattatreya taught Yadu the same “supreme secret” again, but it was the result of his experience and reasoning as an avadhuta. Krishna teaching Uddhava on the south, finally, alludes to the next panel here on the north and intentionally stands directly opposite it. When Krishna finished teaching the “Summary of the *Brahman* Doctrine,” he told Uddhava to go to the Badari ashram where Narayana and Nara live. The next panel in this north-facing sequence represents Badari’s ashram.

THE PANEL. The large figure of Vasudeva, crowned and royally dressed, stands in the western two-thirds of the panel and faces directly north \(Figure 13.5\). He has two pairs of arms. His hands in the back hold the wheel and conch. His front left hand rests on his left hip and thigh, and His front right hand forms the abhayamudra of protection at the level of his shoulder.

Brahma stands on the same level to Vasudeva’s right. He has two pairs of arms and three faces. The two faces at the sides of his front face are damaged, but close inspection of the arrangement of his hair indicates their presence. Brahma tilts his head slightly westward and down, and has a slight smile as if listening intently with pleasure. His front pair of arms forms the anjalimudra. He rests his back right hand on his hip and thigh \(mirroring Vasudeva’s left hand\), and with his back left hand near his hip holds what appears to be his broken water pot. Two unidentified figures sit at the top of the panel.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. This panel represents the essence of Bhagavata Dharma stated concisely in four stanzas \(*BP* 2.9.32–35\), and it signifies the scriptural development of this essence, beginning with Brahma’s teaching his son Narada the *“Bhagavata Purana* of Ten Topics.” Narada later teaches it to the rishi Vyasa at the end of the Dvapara Yuga as he sits on the banks of the Sarasvati River visualizing the Supreme *Brahman* \(*BP* 2.9.40–2.10.47\). This is approximately the *Shrimad Bhagavata Purana* we know today.



### ***Panel N5. Markandeya Teaches about the Rishis Nara and Narayana***

THE STORY. The twin rishis Narayana and Nara derive from a portion \(*amsha*\) of Naranarayana depicted in Panel N2. They are born during the first Manu Term through the master of progeny named Dharma and his wife Murti \(*BP* 1.3.9; 2.7.6–7; 3.4.21–22; 4.1.53–59; 5.19.9–15; 11.4.6\). The brothers go to the Badari ashram on the mountain range Gandhamadana northeast of Bharata \(*BP* 5.16.10\). There they practice severe tapas throughout the kalpa, maintaining absolute serenity and poise of mind to reveal the single Person whose maya creates the universe. Narayana is the guru who remembers and knows everything; and Nara is the disciple who forgets it all. For protection, devotees invoke the pair through the Narayanakavacha mantra. Narayana protects them from the destructive incantations of enemies and from listlessness, and Nara protects them from pride \(*BP* 6.8.16\).

Indra feels threatened by their tapas because he thinks Narayana is seeking the throne of Heaven \(*BP* 11.4.7–16 and 2.7.6–7\). He sends Kama and his company of sensual stimulators to Badari to destroy Narayana’s tapas by arousing him, but Narayana knows why they have come, and to the wonder of Kama offers them ashram hospitality. Narayana lets them see some of the beautiful but invisible apsaras or courtesan dancers who attend him, and he asks them to choose one to take back to Indra. They select the famous Urvashi, who was born from Narayana’s tapas, and they take her to Heaven.17 Later on in the Tretra Yuga \(represented ahead by the vimana’s eastern side\), Urvashi will fall from Heaven through her love affair with the man Pururuvas; and their passionate desire will produce the three fires of the Vedic sacrifice \(*BP* 9.14.40–49\).

The rishi Markandeya, descendent of Bhrigu, is also born during the first Manu Term. He is a Vedic student of his father Mrikanda and dwells in an ashram on the slopes of the Himalayas where the Pushpabhadra River flows by the rock called Chitra, and is celibate for life and pacified. He wears matted hair, garments of bark, a deerskin, a sacred thread, a belt of kusha grass, a rosary of rudraksha beads and kusha grass, and carries a water jar and a staff. Morning and evening he worships Hari in the fire, the sun, the guru, Brahmins, and himself. He collects food as alms, offers it to his guru, and when permitted eats it silently. In this way he worships Hrishikesha, Lord of Senses, for countless years and conquers Death.

The first six Manu Terms of this Daytime of Boar pass during Markandeya’s unified consciousness, and the seventh arrives. By now Indra is alarmed at the power his tapas has generated and sends Kama and his companions to interrupt it in the usual manner. An apsaras appears before the rishi and dances. As she plays with a ball the wind blows off her cloth and Kama shoots the yogin with his five arrows. Yet Markandeya does not stir. Terrified by this self-control, Kama flees with his entourage back to Heaven, and to Indra’s astonishment. Hari in the form of the rishis Narayana and Nara appears to Markandeya to bless him: Narayana is black and Nara is white. Both are tall and have two pairs of arms. Both are dressed as consecrated patrons of a sacrifice and wear deerskin, tree bark, and a sacred thread of three strands. Both have a ring of kusha grass on a finger, a water pot, a bamboo staff, a rosary of lotus seeds, a whisk to brush away insects, and a fistful of grass.

Markandeya prostrates like a stick at their feet and with great emotion seats them, washes their feet, and adorns them with perfumes, incense, and garlands of flowers. He then praises them at length as the embodiment of emancipation \(*moksha*\): “Only this sattvika manifestation leads to eternal peace in emancipation, for your passionate \(*rajasika*\) and delusive \(*tamasika*\) manifestations are sources of misery, delusion, and fear. Those who follow the Pancharatra Agama \(the Satvatas\) say purity \(*sattva*\) is the shape of the Person \(*Purusharupa*\), and that his \[Vaikuntha\] world of sattva is attained only through purity \(*sattva*\). I venerate Narayana the seer and Hamsa the best of men” \(*BP* 12.8.40–49\).18

Nara’s friend Narayana then offers Markandeya a boon \(*BP* 12.9\). Markandeya says he wants to experience the maya that causes the world and its protectors to think that true being \(*sat*\) is differentiated \(*sad-bheda*\) \(*BP* 12.9.6\). Narayana with Nara smile and say that Bhrigu’s descendent would indeed experience it, and then return to Badari.

Markandeya continued to think of the promise as he worshiped the Bhagavan as immanent in fire, sun, moon, water, earth, air, sky, and Self. He visualized him and worshiped him with visualized substances. His love \(*prema*\) was so great that sometimes he forgot to worship \(*BP* 12.9.9\). One day at twilight \(*samdhya*\), while Markandeya sat on the river bank meditating, a fantastic storm arose \(*BP* 12.9.10–19\). The ocean flooded earth, and its waters reached the sky, submerging all three worlds, all stars, and all planets. Markandeya was terrified and alone, drifting in the waters as if mad and blind, his matted hair hanging loose. He could see nothing in the darkness—no land, no sky, no directions. Hungry and thirsty, tossed and battered by fierce winds and waves, overcome with fatigue, bitten by animals who fought over him, his feelings ranged through grief, pleasure, fear, and dread. Hundreds of thousands of years seemed to pass. Vishnu’s maya had caught him and the seer could not see.

Suddenly, Markandeya saw something, a banyan tree with new leaves and fruit standing on a summit of earth \(*BP* 12.9.20–34\). On its northeastern branch, he saw a shining infant lying in the middle of a leaf, a wondrous baby the color of a splendid emerald, sucking his foot. The sight soothed MarkandeyaS’s fatigue, and he approached the infant as his body hairs stood on end. But when he drew near, the baby inhaled Markandeya as if he were a mosquito, and the seer now saw the entire universe as it had been before. Everything was there inside the infant—the sky, earth, stars, mountains, oceans, continents, devas, asuras, forests, villages, rivers, cities, farms, cowherd settlements, the four classes and stages of life, the elements, the yugas, the kalpas, and Time. He saw the Himalaya and his own ashram, and even his fellow seers.

While he was observing all that, the baby suddenly exhaled him and Markandeya was back in the dark water, gazing at the infant resting on the banyan leaf and glancing at him with a sweet smile. Overwhelmed by feelings, Markandeya once again drew near to embrace the child, but he—the Ruler of Yoga Dwelling in the Cave—disappeared. Everything suddenly vanished, and Markandeya found himself at his own ashram. Markandeya now knew that he had experienced Narayana’s Yogamaya, and took refuge in him. “O Hari,” he said, “I am a refugee \(*prapanna*\) at the soles of the feet that free the refugee from great anxiety, for by your maya, those who appear wise are deluded by their own learning” \(*BP* 12.10.1–2\).

One day as Shiva and Devi passed in the sky over the Himalaya, they saw Markandeya below. Impressed with the perfect stillness of his practice, Devi asked Shiva to give him a boon. Shiva said that the Brahmin seer had no desire for boons, even for emancipation, for he had attained supreme attachment \(*bhakti para*\) to the Bhagavan. Nevertheless, Shiva said they should go down and talk to him, for association with holy people \(*sadhu-samagama*\) is the highest thing to obtain.

Shiva and Devi descended to Markandeya, who did not see them because he was absorbed in samadhi \(*BP* 12.10.8–13\). Shiva used his own yogamaya to get his attention, and entered the space within the cave \(*guha-akasha*\) of his heart. He appeared there wearing a tiger skin and with reddish brown matted hair, three eyes, and ten arms with which he carried a trident, a khatvanga, a shield, a rosary of rudraksha beads, a damaru drum, a skull as a begging bowl, a sword, and a bow. Astonished to see that form in his heart \(*hridi*\), Markandeya emerged from samadhi to find out what had happened. As soon he saw the single guru of the three worlds with Uma, he prostrated and worshiped them with hospitality, saying “Veneration to you who are auspicious \(*shiva*\) and pacified, who as purity \(*sattva*\) gives joy to the world. Veneration to you who are passion \(*rajas*\), and to you who are delusion \(*tamas*\), but without fierceness \(*aghora*\)” \(*BP* 12.10.17\).

The narrating shuta said that Shiva, “who is the Primordial God and goal of the sants” was pleased \(*BP* 12.10.18\) and responded as if he were all three members of the trimurti, Vishnu, Brahma, and Rudra: “Ask whatever boon you want, for we three are the lords of those who give boons. All the worlds and the protectors of the worlds honor and worship Brahmins who are holy persons \(*sadhu*\), pacified, without attachments, beneficent to all beings, clinging to only one god \(*ekantabhakta*\), free from antagonism, and looking on all equally. So do I, as do Bhagavan Brahma and the ruling Hari himself \(*BP* 12.10.20–21\). Such people do not see the slightest difference between me, the Immovable, and the Unborn Brahma, nor between oneself and other people, and we honor you \(*BP* 12.10.11\). Tirthas and images of devas purify after a long time, but holy people purify on sight. Veneration to the Brahmins who use samadhi, tapas, devout study, and self-control to hold us in the shape \(*rupa*\) of three Vedas. Just from hearing of you and seeing you great sinners \(*mahapatakiri*\) and even the lowest castes \(*antyaja*\) attain purity, so imagine what will result from talking with you.”

Shiva’s words relieved Markandeya of the distress he felt from Vishnu’s maya \(*BP* 12.10.35–37\). “It is a puzzling play of the Lord when rulers venerate those they rule,” he noted. After further comment Markandeya asked that he might have attachment \(*bhakti*\) to the Immovable Bhagavan, to Shiva, and to his devotees \(*BP* 12.10.34\). With Devi’s agreement, Shiva granted his request before they left: “You will have devotion, you will have freedom from old age and death to the end of the kalpa, you will have knowledge of the past, present, and future, and you will be an acharya of the Puranas.”

The shuta concluded the story by noting that the famous and great yogin Markandeya moves about the universe to this day. His experience of the deluge created through maya had seemed to him to have lasted seven kalpas and some have misunderstood that, he explained. They erroneously think the deluge was the deluge that occurs at the end of Brahma’s day and that Markandeya has lived for seven kalpas.

The version of the story that the shuta “corrected” appears in “The Session with Markandeya” in the *Mahabharata* \(3.179–221; van Buitenen 2: 567–664; the baby on the banyan leaf appears in 3.186–187\). According to that telling, Markandeya did survive the deluge before this kalpa, which was why he was able to identify the baby he had seen on the banyan leaf as Krishna who is Narayana himself \(*Mbh* 3.187.50–55\). The shuta’s “correction,” however, fits the story into a consistent view of time: No one on earth, not even Markandeya, will escape being eaten by the Bhagavan when Rudra Shiva emerges from the Plower formation as Brahma goes to sleep. The “correction” also reveals the later age of Book Twelve.

Shiva’s boon that Markandeya will be an acharya of the Puranas refers to the *Markandeya Purana*, which contains three stories relevant to this context. One is a story about Harishchandra, whom Shuka briefly introduced in his history of the Solar Dynasty \(*BP* 9.7.7–27\). The story develops his fame for faithfulness to truth and for giving \(*MP* 4–9\). Another is about Dattatreya \(*MP* 16–19; 36–44\)> who appears in the first panel on the south-facing side. The third is Markandeya’s famous “Glorification of the Goddess” \(*Devi Mahatmyam*\), which celebrates Narayana’s Yoganidra, “Sleep of Unified Consciousness” \(*MP* 81–93\). She emerged within spacetime first as the Goddess Chandika Durga and then as Gauri, and her anger appeared as Kali. She became Parvati, True Wife \(Sati\) reborn to be Shiva’s wife. As we have noted, Goddess Chandika Durga appears nowhere on the Vishnu-house. She is present only as Slayer of the Buffalo Asura in her lion, sculpted all around the temple. Apparently, the consecrating unction \(*abhisheka*\) of the palace \(*vimana*\) implanted brilliant conquering power into the brick, stone, and paint of the lions that guard the “skin” of God’s body.19

THE PANEL. The upper and larger portion of the panel depicts the Badari ashram on the Gandhamadana mountain range to the northeast \(Figure 13.6\).20 The seer Narayana with two pairs of arms sits on a platform in the center of the eastern two-thirds of the panel. His head tilts slightly to the west and his piled-up hair resembles a crown. His stretched earlobes touch his shoulder with an object hanging at their ends. He faces forward, but gazes slightly downward toward the standing figure of Nara at his left. His back pair of hands holds the wheel and conch; the latter is clearly visible but the former is not. His front left arm has been broken off. His front right arm bends at the elbow and his hand forms the jnanamudra at the level of his chest: the thumb folds over three fingers and the little finger is raised up \(*PS* 1974: 73\). Narayana’s knees bend and his shins cross, the right in front of the left.




FIGURE 13.6. Panel N5: Markandeya teaches about the rishis Nara and Narayana. AIIS.


The disciple Nara stands on the western side of the panel, his feet at its bottom and his hips at the level of the platform on which Narayana sits. He too has hair piled up to look like a crown, two stretched earlobes with something at the end touching his shoulders, and two pairs of arms, which are not immediately obvious. His front two hands hold the anjalimudra. His back left hand rests on his left thigh, but the arm is hidden behind the adjacent pillar. His back right arm is not visible, but the curled fingers of his right hand appear above Narayana’s left thigh. Nara wears two strands of beads around his neck, three strands of rope around his left front wrists, and a rope hanging from his left shoulder across his chest and under his right arm.

The portion of the panel beneath Narayana’s platform depicts Markandeya’s ashram at Pushpabhadra. Markandeya, with two arms and matted hair encircling his head, sits at the panel’s center in a posture resembling Narayana’s above. His left hand is directly in front of Nara’s right knee; its thumb and forefinger touch and the remaining fingers rise up to form the mudra known as buddha, or tattva, or jnana \(*PS* 1974: nos. 55 and 72\). His right hand at the level of his chest is damaged. He wears a single strand of rudraksha beads around his neck, two ropes around his left upper arm, three around his left wrist, and perhaps three around his right forearm. Strands of rope hang from his left shoulder under his right arm, and the end of a cloth appears to hang over his left shoulder. To his right and slightly behind him sits another ascetic, who looks toward him as he listens to the lesson illustrated above by the larger figures of Narayana and Nara. The disciple is probably Vyasa’s disciple Jaimini, who wants to understand the origins of his guru’s *Mahabharata*. Markandeya explains its origins to him in the first forty-four chapters of his *Markandeya Purana*, where he refers to Narayana as Vasudeva with three vyuha formations \(ch. 4\) And he begins it the way Vyasa begins his *Mahabharata*, with the invocation of the rishis Narayana and Nara, as depicted above.

Above the head of Nara and to the west of Narayana’s head and crown flies a figure forming the anjalimudra. His head may have either a crown or a tall pile of hair encircled by a halo; perhaps it is Soma the Moon. Above Narayana’s crown to the east appears the face of a second figure, badly damaged, also with a halo; perhaps he is Surya the Sun. Directly over Narayana ‘s head is the torso and head of a third figure. The face of a fourth may be to his left.

THE PANEL’S MEANINGS. The Badari ashram is located in the northeast, as is this panel. Narayana and Nara are visual illustrations of the literal meaning of the eight-syllable mantra “*Om*, veneration to Narayana” \(*Om namo narayanaya*\): Nara the disciple who forgets venerates Narayana the guru who remembers. They are dual manifestations of the single Narayana, and models of the guru and disciple. Here, as at Badari, they portray satsanga, “association \(*sanga*\) with those who have true being \(*sat*\).” Devotees like Uddhava and Narada associate with them by living at their ashram and serving them. Kapila introduced satsanga in the panel before this one, and the theme appears throughout the *Bhagavata Purana*, whose condensed origin the panel before that one recorded. Krishna explained satsanga more fully in the “Summary of the *Brahman* Doctrine” represented by the south-facing panel directly opposite \(Panel S2\).

Satsanga means that devotees who seek to gain the direct sight of Krishna in this life will live around those who already perceive him, the “supreme Bhagavatas” \(*parama-bhagavata*\) who live only to serve him and do not desire even emancipation from birth and death *\(moksha\)*. They are the sants who talk about Krishna all the time. By listening to them talk, Krishna’s story enters the devotees’ mind through the ears and eventually produces ardent desire for him, which causes them to seek direct perception of him. That is why Krishna told Uddhava to go to Badari; there he will gain direct perception of him after his human form had “died.”

This pair as the embodiment of desire’s pacification in the Krita Yuga alludes ahead to desire inflamed in the Treta Yuga by the apsaras Urvashi, who emerged from tapas of Narayana and Nara *\(BP* 2.7.6\). She will become the lover of Pururuvas of the Lunar Dynasty, and their passion will produce the fire of the Vedic sacrifice in the Treta Yuga represented by the eastern side \(*BP* 2.7.6–7; 5.19.1–15; 9.1.34–35; 9.14.15–49; 11.4.7–16\). Moreover, as guru and disciple Nara and Narayana allude further ahead to the southern side’s Dvapara Yuga, when “Narayana, the ancient friend of Nara” appears as Krishna, and his forgetful disciple Nara appears as Arjuna \(*BP* 10.69.16; *BG* 4.5\).

Markandeya in the panel also represents the *Markandeya Purana*, which consists of two parts. Shiva said Markandeya would be an acharya of the puranas, and he appears in the panel teaching Jaimini the purana’s first part \(*MP* 1–44\). This part includes: 1\) the story of Harishchandra, famous for faithfulness to truth and for giving; and 2\) the story of Dattatreya, who appears in Panels S1 and S\). Markandeya teaches the purana’s second part to his disciple Kraushtuki \(*MP* 45–137\). This “purana” had issued from Brahma’s mouths along with the Vedas. Bhrigu heard it and taught it to Daksha, and Daksha taught it to Markandeya \(*MP* 45.20–136\).

Furthermore, Markandeya is depicted wearing rudraksha beads in the manner of Shaivas. This refers to his encounter with Shiva in his heart, and perhaps to a belief that Markandeya is an ardent devotee of Shiva. On a cosmic scale, the apparent appearance of Soma and Surya in this panel alludes to the duration of this Daytime of Boar—”as long as the sun and moon exist”—and to the continued presence in it of the rishis Narayana, Nara, and Markandeya.

We earlier noted a parallel between this panel’s portrayal of Narayana and Markandeya: Both are teachers, who sit in similar postures; both form mudras with similar meanings but with opposite hands, and their listeners are on opposite sides. There is a similar parallel in their respective stories: Both were the subjects of Indra’s jealousy, both were attacked by Kama and his companions, and both were unmoved by it. Those attempts at sexual arousal anticipate panels that lie ahead. The apsaras dancing, playing ball, and losing her garment in front of Markandeya appears again in the stories of another twilight \(Panel E3\) and of Mohini \(Panel S6\). The apsaras Urvashi anticipates the story of Pururuvas \(Panel E1\), and Harishchandra anticipates the theme of extreme self-giving in stories connected with Dattatreya \(Panels S1 and S3\). Goddesses Chandika Durga and Bhadrakali anticipate the prayogic rites of the south side \(Panels S4, S5, S6\). They also point to the earlier Goddess temple that stood at Kanchipuram’s center, since moved to become her residence as Goddess Kamakshi, known also as Lalita.21 The Markandeya story similarly points to Rajasimha’s grand Shiva temple across the city, but the story’s subordination of Shiva to Narayana subordinates that older imperial structure to this one newly built by Nandivarman Pallavamalla.




