+++
title = "3 iii \\) Conclusions"

+++

In this chapter I have attempted to give an overview of the ways in which authors of the Pāñcarātra scriptures associated their own tradition with that of the Veda. 

Needless to say, this is not intended to be an exhaustive account. As we have seen, the claim that the Pāñcarātra scriptures are “rooted in the Veda” \( *vedamūlatva*\) appears to have a long history, since it is mentioned already in Bhaṭṭa Jayanta’s ninth-tenth century ĀḌ. However, it is not included in the early Saṃhitās, and of the works available to me, its earliest articulation *on behalf of* the Pāñcarātra is in Yāmuna’s ĀP. 

Numerous scriptural works postdating Yāmuna also contain this claim, and it can be found as well among the commentarial works of several of Yāmuna’s influential Vedāntin successors, including Rāmānuja \(twelfth century\) and Madhva \(1238-1317\). The latter’s formulation of the *vedamūlatva* principle appears to be indebted to Yāmuna, though the scope of its application is substantially broader \(see Stoker 2004\). In the later scriptural literature there is an increasing tendency to present the Pāñcarātra as conforming to orthodox norms, both in terms of its religious practice and in its attitudes towards social class. Hence, many later works restrict the participation of Śūdras, limiting their eligibility to the lower categories of initiate, and prohibiting them from reciting mantras. Some of these texts enjoin the performance of reparation rites in the event that the temple icon has been touched by a Śūdra. However, despite these restrictions, Pāñcarātra traditions of “mixed 230 See Stein \(1980: 233 *ff*\) on the increase in non-Brahmin participation in Tamil temples from the twelfth century. [[131]]

worship” continued to initiate Śūdras, and in so doing very likely gave themselves an advantage over the more orthodox, and less flexible, Vaidika or Smārta ritualists. 

For, as we have seen, in South India during the period in which these texts were composed, powerful Śūdra communities were increasingly active in the patronage of religion. 

That the authors of the South Indian Saṃhitās were more intent upon alligning themselves with Vedic tradition than were their North Indian predecessors can be partly explained, no doubt, by the influence of the Śrīvaiṣṇava tradition, and especially of Yāmuna and, from the twelfth century, Rāmānuja. Both of these influential thinkers lent their support to the Pāñcarātra – the former, as we have seen, in the ĀP, and the latter by the temple reforms he instituted at Śrīraṅgam and, if the hagiographies are to be believed, elsewhere in the south. While Yāmuna defended the Pāñcarātra against its orthodox opponents, and Rāmānuja favoured them over the more orthodox Vaikhānasa tradition, both were nonetheless themselves thoroughly grounded in orthodox Brahminical culture. We know that Rāmānuja, especially, was a traditionalist with regard to matters relating to social class \( *varṇa*\), holding, for example, that Śūdras should not be granted access to the knowledge contained in the Upaniṣads \(Clooney 2002\). Indeed, Rāmānuja’s own social identity, as a Smārta Brahmin from the Vaḍama sub-caste \(Carman 1974: 28\), shows us that worshippers from orthodox backgrounds were affiliating themselves with the Pāñcarātra during this period. There is, as far as I am aware, no way of knowing if the claims to membership within a Vedic lineage, such as we find in several Mantrasiddhānta texts including the PādS \(cp 21.2ff\), the *Adhikaḥ Pāṭhaḥ* \(109\) and an interpolated section of the LT \(41.67-78, see Rastelli 2006: 233\), are genuine or not. Clearly not all Mantrasiddhāntins could claim this ancestry, and the right, therefore, to be called ‘Bhāgavata’ \(see PādS *cp* 21.14-15\). We can suppose, nonetheless, that among those who did, some came, like Rāmānuja, from Brahminical families which were not, historically, associated with the Pāñcarātra. The processes of Vedification undergone by South Indian Pāñcarātra traditions of mixed worship may have been in large part instigated by these kinds of converts. [[132]]