+++
title = "203"
+++
Teachers with and without Attachment 
२०३ | अत्र ब्रह्मवैवर्ते विशेषः - 
THERE ARE some definitive statements regarding the qualifications of a teacher in the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa: 
वक्ता सरागो नीरागो द्विविधः परिकीर्तितः । 
सरागो लोलुपः कामी तदुक्तं हृन् न संस्पृशेत् ॥ ६०५ ॥ उपदेशं करोत्येव न परीक्षां करोति च । 
अपरीक्ष्योपदिष्टं यल्लोकनाशाय तद् भवेत् ॥ ६०६ || 
An instructor (vakta) can be of two types - with attachment (sarāga) or without attachment (nīrāga). The attached instructor (sarāga-vakta) is greedy and covetous, and his words are unable to touch the student's heart. Such a teacher only offers instruction, but he does not test the student. Instruction given without testing leads to the destruction of society. (Brahmavaivarta Purana)1 
किंच- 
And further on [a reference to the unattached instructor (nīrāga-vaktā)]: 
1 
vaktā sarāgo nīrāgo dvi-vidhah parikirtitaḥ 
sarāgo lolupaḥ kāmī tad uktam hṛn na samspṛset upadeśam karoty eva na parikṣām karoti ca apariksyopadistam yal-loka-näsaya tad bhavet 
1276 
203 Teachers with and without Attachment 
कुलं शीलमथाचारमविचार्य परं गुरुम् । 
भजेत श्रवणाद्यर्थी सरसं सारसागरम् ॥ ६०७ ॥ 
An aspirant who is eager to hear should accept a highly realized preceptor (param-guru), who is adept in tasting transcendental aesthetic experience (sarasa), and who is an ocean of the essence of immediately realized truth (sära-sāgara), without consideration of his family, conduct, or behavior. (Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa)2 
सरसत्वादिकं च व्यञ्जितं तत्रैवान्यत्र- 
Elsewhere in the same Purāṇa, we find the following statement that is symptomatic of the param-guru's adeptness in tasting rasa (sarasatva) [because only the preceptor who is genuinely absorbed in such taste can convey the same experience to others]: 
कामक्रोधादियुक्तोऽपि कृपणोऽपि विषादवान् । 
श्रुत्वा विकाशमायाति स वक्ता परमो गुरुः || ६०८ ।। 
That instructor (vakta) is a highly realized preceptor (paramguru) on hearing from whom even a person engulfed in desire and anger, or even a dejected soul steeped in despair, attains the experiential condition of the blossoming of the heart (vikāśa). (Brahma-vaivarta Purāna) 
akulam silam athācāram avicārya param gurum 
bhajeta śravanady-arthim sarasam sara-sāgaram ⚫ kama-krodhādi-yukto'pi kṛpano'pi viṣādavān 
śrutvā vikāśam āyāti sa vaktā paramo guruh 
According to the theory of Indian aesthetics (rasa theory), as discussed in Comparative Aesthetics, Volume 1 (p. 470), the functional capacity (vrtti) of the spoken word that conduces to rasa is responsible for putting the mind in four conditions necessary for the aesthetic experience of rasa - namely, (1) vikasa, or "blooming of the heart," (2) vikşepa, "dispersion," (3) sankoca, "contraction," and (4) vistara, "expansion." Here, the mention of vikasa implies the other three and thus signifies in a general way the necessary internal condition for rasa. Ordinarily, this type of experience would be impossible for the person described in the verse, who lacks the necessary condition of the heart that could make the tasting of rasa possible. That even such a person is enabled with this eligibility simply by hearing the words of a highly realized guru, indicates that the guru himself is genuinely absorbed in such taste, and thus his words are endowed with the required functional power (vrtti-viseṣa). 
1277 
II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
एवम्भूतगुरोरभावाद् युक्तिभेदबुभुत्सया बहूनप्याश्रयन्ते केचित् । यथा (भा० ११ । ९ । ३१ ) - 
Because a guru of this caliber may not be available, some people accept many teachers, desiring to learn the fundamentals of logical analysis and the philosophical distinctions between different wisdom schools, as Śrī Dattatreya said: 
न ह्येकस्माद् गुरोर्ज्ञानं सुस्थिरं स्यात् सुपुष्कलम् । ब्रह्मैतदद्वितीयं वै गीयते बहुधर्षिभिः ।। ६०९ ।। 
Although the Absolute Truth, Brahman, is nondual in nature, It has been extolled in manifold ways by different sages. For this reason, knowledge obtained from just a single teacher cannot attain perfect stability or completion. (SB 11.9.31)* 
स्पष्टम् ॥ श्रीदत्तात्रेयो यदुम् ॥ 
The meaning here is self-evident. 
Commentary 
IN THE previous anuccheda, it was said that the internal devotional disposition (bhāva) and prowess (prabhāva) of a sadhu influence the person who associates with him. This is also true of his behavioral characteristics, which may not always conform to socially accepted norms of behavior. This is why it is recommended that one should associate with a sadhu of virtuous conduct. This is summed up in the following statement: 
4 
5 
By associating with people of an inferior nature, one's intelligence becomes degraded. By associating with those of the same caliber, it remains at the same level, but by associating with those who are uniquely distinguished, one's intelligence becomes similarly qualified. (Hitopadesa 1.41)5 
na hy ekasmad guror jñānam su-sthiram syat supuskalam 
brahmaitad advitiyam vai giyate bahudharṣibhih 
hiyate hi matis tāta hinaiḥ saha samagamat 
samais ca samatam eti visistais ca visistatăm 
1278 
203 Teachers with and without Attachment 
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī cites Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya to illustrate that the qualities of a sadhu or guru reflect in a student, just as the color of a proximate object is reflected in crystal (BRS 1.2.229). Therefore, the teacher should be of good conduct, otherwise his ill-character will influence the student adversely. Moreover, if a teacher is not realized himself and lacks faith in the teachings he expounds, they will not touch the heart of his student. For this reason, sage Prabuddha stipulated that the guru should be directly realized in the Truth, pare brahmani nisnātam (SB 11.3.21). 
There are professional speakers of Srimad Bhagavata in Vṛndavana and elsewhere who draw big crowds. But their lectures do not have much positive influence on the audience. This is because such speakers themselves do not follow the teachings of the book. They use the teachings only to earn money and attract followers. Such professional speakers are analogous to a spoon that is used to serve sweets the spoon itself never tastes the sweets that it dispenses. In Vṛndāvana, there are schools to train professional speakers of Śrimad Bhāgavata. The objective of these schools has nothing to do with God-realization. 
— 
Another important point made here is that the teacher should also test the student. He should not impart knowledge to an unqualified student. If he does, it will only bring ruination to society, because the unqualified student will misuse the knowledge for a material purpose. In the past, gurus were very strict and would not teach anyone and everyone. They would make sure that the student's interest was in bhakti alone and not in profit. This would only be possible if the teacher himself was not covetous and greedy. There is a story about Rāmānujācārya that his guru refused to accept him as a student no less than eighteen times. Narottama Dāsa Thakura was similarly refused by Lokanatha Gosvāmi for a long time. 
At present, such strict testing of students is generally missing. Teachers are very eager to acquire students, and there is much competition between them. For this reason, the standard of bhakti has gone down in comparison to what it used to be fifty or sixty years 
ago. 
1279II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
There may appear to be a contradiction between the first couplet of verses cited in this anuccheda from the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna and the third verse quoted from the same source. The first two verses effectively warn the prospective student not to hear from an attached instructor (saraga-vaktā), who is covetous and full of material desires. This warning carries with it the imperative for a student to first examine the character of the teacher. 
The third verse, however, declares that one should not make any consideration about the family background and character of a teacher. This apparent contradiction is resolved because the third verse is spoken in reference to a teacher who is sarasa, meaning that he is absorbed in tasting transcendental aesthetic experience (rasa) and is thus without any ulterior motive. If one is fortunate enough to encounter a guru of this stature, the question of his family background and character loses all relevance. One's investigative powers are better served simply to study under him. 
As confirmed in the verse that follows from the same Purāṇa, the words of the highly realized sarasa guru are invested with the transformative power to induce a blossoming of the heart (vikāśa) that conduces to rasa, even if heard by a person afflicted by desire, lust, and greed. Certainly, if the words of a teacher can free the student from lust and greed, then the teacher himself must be free from these base qualities. 
If one cannot find a guru of the caliber described in this and the previous anucchedas, then one should endeavor to learn the truth from different teachers. Dattatreya is an example of this approach. He speaks of twenty-four gurus (SB 11.7.33-35). Of course, these were not human gurus who personally taught him through aural instruction. Rather, his teachers were for the most part either the great elements of nature or select members of the animal kingdom. It was Dattatreya himself who learned from them through his own intuitive powers by carefully observing their behavior. He counted even insentient phenomena, such as the earth and the air, in his list of gurus. 
This example is not meant to obviate the need for a single living human preceptor, especially for those on the path of bhakti. In 
1280 
203 Teachers with and without Attachment 
bhakti, one should have only one mantraor dīkṣā-guru and study from him. If there are subjects that the dikṣa-guru is unable to teach or if he is physically incapable of doing so, then one can study, with his permission, from other teachers who have a complementary mood and are not inimical toward him. 
1281 
