+++
title = "213"
+++
The Guru Is Most Dear to Bhagavān 
२१३ | शुद्धभक्तास्त्वेके श्रीगुरोः श्रीशिवस्य च श्रीभगवता सहाभेददृष्टिं तत्प्रियतमत्वेनैव मन्यन्ते । यथा (भा० ४।३०१३८)- 
ON THE other hand, some pure devotees regard Śri guru and Śrī Śiva as nondistinct from Sri Bhagavan, simply on the basis of their being most dear to Him. The Pracetas conveyed this idea to the eight-armed form of Bhagavan [who had appeared before them]: 
. 
वयं तु साक्षाद् भगवन् भवस्य प्रियस्य सख्युः क्षणसङ्गमेन । 
सुदुश्चिकित्स्यस्य भवस्य मृत्योर्भिषक्तमं त्वाद्य गतिं गताः स्म ॥ ६३० ॥ 
O Bhagavan, by a moment's association with Your dear friend Bhava (Śiva), we have directly attained You as our ultimate destination and as the topmost physician for treating the virtually incurable disease of material existence (bhava)' in the form of repeated birth and death. (SB 4.30.38)2 
टीका च - "तव यः प्रियः सखा तस्य भवस्य । अत्यन्तमचिकित्स्यस्य भवस्य जन्मनो मृत्योश्च भिषक्तमं सद्वैद्यं त्वां गतिं प्राप्ताः" इत्येषा । 
Śrīdhara Svāmi also comments: "[By the association] of this Bhava (Śiva), who is Your dear friend, we have attained You 
Here there is a play on the word bhava, which means "material existence" and is also a name for Śiva. So, by the association of "Bhava," the Pracetas attained Bhagavan as the topmost physician to treat the disease of “bhava." 
2 vayam tu sākṣād bhagavan bhavasya priyasya sakhyuh kṣana-sangamena 
suduścikitsyasya bhavasya mrtyor bhisaktamam tvadya gatim gataḥ smaḥ 
1325 
II How Akincana-bhakti Is Attained 
as our ultimate destination (gati) and as the topmost physician (bhişaktama), or expert healer (sad-vaidya), to treat the virtually incurable disease of material existence (bhava) in the form of repeated birth and death." 
श्रीशिवो ह्येषां वक्तृणां गुरुः ॥ श्रीप्रचेतसः श्रीमदष्टभुजपुरुषम् ॥ 
Śrī Śiva is the guru of the Pracetas, who spoke this verse. 
Commentary 
THE PRESENT VERSE is spoken by the Pracetas, who accepted Śiva as their guru, recognizing him as both a great devotee and a dear friend of Bhagavan. Up until now, it has been said that the guru is directly Bhagavan and should be respected accordingly. In fact, one of the most popular verses in India about the guru goes as follows: 
The guru is Brahma; the guru is Visņu; the guru is Deva Mahesvara (Śiva). Indeed, the guru alone is the Supreme Reality (Parambrahma). I bow down to him, Śrī Guru. (Skanda Purana, Gurugītā 1.1)3 
Now, Śri Jiva reveals a still higher secret, namely, the transrational principle of simultaneous distinction and nondistinction (acintya-bheda-abheda). The guru is to be respected as Bhagavan Himself, implying their nondistinction (abheda), yet he is the most dear devotee of Bhagavan, which entails the distinction between lover and beloved (bheda). The guru's oneness with Bhagavan is due to the totality of his love, yet he is not absolutely one with Him in the ontological sense. This is the understanding of highly realized devotees. In this regard, Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti has 
3 
sung: 
I bow down to the lotus feet of Śrī Guru, who is proclaimed by 
all the scriptures as Hari Himself [Śrī Kṛṣṇa] and who is honored 
gurur brahma gurur visnur guruh devo maheśvaraḥ 
gurur eva paraṁ brahma tasmai sri gurave namaḥ 
1326 
213 The Guru Is Most Dear to Bhagavan 
in this manner by saints, yet he indeed is a beloved devotee of Bhagavan. (Gurvastakam 7)^ 
The relation between Siva and Kṛṣṇa is of the same nature of oneness and distinction. In many places, Śiva is depicted as nondifferent from Krsna or Visnu, yet he is also known as a great devotee of Visņu. The oneness between them is due to love. Therefore, the guru and Śiva should be honored as great devotees of Krsna. This attitude is very pleasing to Bhagavan. It is to be noted, however, that to meditate on the guru exclusively as Sākṣad Bhagavan runs counter to the mood of practice in rāgānuga-bhakti, because in this type of devotion, one serves Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of a guru who is himself a devotee. In rāgānuga, the mood is to be the servant of a servant and not a direct servant of Krsna. If the guru is accepted as Bhagavan directly, there can be no rāgānugā, because the latter means to follow the raga of Bhagavan's associates. 
HERE ENDS VOLUME I OF SRI BHAKTI SANDARBHA. 
sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-sāstrair uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhiḥ kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya vande guroḥ śri caraṇāravindam 
BHAKTI is a specific functional capacity of Bhagavan's intrinsic potency, and as such, it belongs to Him alone. By His causeless grace, He invests this potency into His devotees, who can then transmit it to other living beings by the same power of grace. Without the grace of a devotee or Bhagavan, bhakti cannot make its appearance within the atma. In this regard, since Bhagavan is not manifest to people in general except when He descends into the material world as an avatara, His direct grace is scarcely available. Consequently, at all other times, when there is no manifest avatara on earth, bhakti is available only through the grace of a devotee. 
The devotees' grace has no specific cause, because they are not in need of anything material. Their grace usually comes about through the medium of hearing their words and rendering some form of personal service to them. This grace is first transmitted in the form of faith, śraddha, appearing in those who receive their grace. Initially, this faith is directed toward the very same devotees whose presence and teachings originally gave birth to it. One is then struck with the feeling that such realized devotees are exceptional human beings, and one is drawn to associate with them, listen to what they say, and render service to them. 
From the commentary on Anuccheda 11 
SJIVA 
Jiva Institute of 
Vaishnava Studies 
Vrindavan
