+++
title = "01 THE SACRED HILL OF TIRUVENGADAM FROM THE ANCIENT TIMES"
+++

In ancient Tamil literature the sacred shrine of Tirumala is referred to by the name Vengadam. This is generally understood to refer to the hill, though quite often the reference is as much to the territory surrounding it. The northern Vengadam or Vada Vengadam, is generally spoken of, in ancient Tamil literature as the northern boundary of the Tamil speaking country. Tolkappiyam, the most ancient classical Tamil grammar, which is said to be one of the oldest pieces of Tamil literature extant, defines the area where Tamil speaking people lived, as situated between the hill Vengadam in the north and the Kumari or the Cape Comorin in the south and between the seas in the east and in the west. Thus from very ancient days, the Tirumala hills have been recognised as the landmark through which the Tamil speaking people had to pass, to reach regions where Tamil was not spoken. 

The language spoken to the north of Vengadam was known to ancient Tamil literature as Vaduku and the chieftains of this place were known as princes of the Vadukas in classical Tamil (Vadukar Perumakan). There is at least one chieftain, the ruler by name Erumai, who is referred to, known as Vadukar Perumakan and the context it occurs, it would appear that he ruled over an area, in a part of the present northern Mysore and the territory adjoining it. The road leading to the Vaduka country was referred to in ancient Tamil literature as Vadukar-munai, which means the outposts of the Tamil Country in the grand trunk road leading into the Vaduka land.  \
Vengadam is the name of the Hill according to the ancient Tamil grammar Tolkappiyam. The Sangam poet Mamulanar also gives the same name to the Hill. Mamulanar refers to fairs and festivals on the hill, which obviously indicate the existence of a temple, and which were occasions for exchange of certain commodities by barter. Both Tolkappiyam and Mamulanar do not refer to the name of the Deity or Tiruvengadamudaiyan or in any other manner or variant of the name, nor is the existence of any other temple for any other deity mentioned. But “Silappadikaram” , another ancient Tamil work, gives a description of the deity on the Vengadam Hill, which shows that the deity is Vishnu. 

