+++
title = "02 TIRUMALA IN EARLY CLASSICAL TAMIL SANGAM LITERATURE"
+++

The ancient classical Tamil literature known as Sangam literature consists of a number of collections of poems, which at one time must have been more generally current in Tamilnadu. Popularly, Sangams are divided into three Sangams, each of which has its own patron poets. These poems, as seen from their nature, seem to exhibit various modes of composition, displaying the poetic skill of the authors. The Sangam poetry, is thus mostly a collection of anthologies, put together from some of the excellent pieces of the composition of these ancient poets, to give typical illustrations of the various modes of composition. 

In ancient Tamil literature one particular author Perundevanar is reputed to have composed the Tamil poem Bharata, and who is therefore generally referred to as Perundavanar who composed ancient Tamil Bharata, as distinct from other Perundevanars which is a fairly common ancient Tamil name. This Perundevanar, who is a very early author, composed the well known 'eight collections,' and in addition, he also composed the verses in invocation, which relate to all the well known deities of the land at that time. The date of this is not correctly fixed but the consensus is that it belonged to the early years of the christian era. We can only surmise with some authority, based on a late 10th century copper plate charter which refers to a Pandyan King, “the victor of Talaiyalanganam,” that this literature must be deemed to have relation to the period before the Pandya, the victor of Talaiyalanganam. 

There are references quoted in these various anthologies of Sangam literature, which mention Tirupati by the name of Vengadam. Generally Tirupati is referred in these as the northern border land of the Tamil speaking people, as is also the case with Tolkappiyam. 

Among these early authors referring to Tirupati, we can distinguish two, who are contemporary with the Pandyan, victor of Talaiyalanganam already referred to, viz., Kalladanar and Nakkirar. The 83rd verse of the famous 'Ahananuru' refers to the chieftain Pulli of the region surrounding Vengadam. In this verse he is described as Ilaignar Perumakan. The use of the Tamil word Kalla in this context, would refer to uncultivated areas. In other words, this reference would appear to indicate a state of things when extensive agricultural cultivation had not been resorted to. In poem 209 of the same anthology Ahananuru, the same author, mentions again Pulli and his Vengadam, and goes on to say that there was a narrow passage across the hill, described as a tunnel, through which one had to pass to emerge from the territory of the chieftain Pulli to the north. 

Nakkirar who is a very famous and well known ancient Tamil poet, and who figures in very many well known legends, does not refer to Vengadam as such, but refers to the territory dominated by the Vengadam, when he speaks of Tiraiyan and his capital Pavattiri, Reddipalem, in the Gudur Taluq of Nellore District. In poem 253 Nakkirar again speaks of Vadukar Perumakan, Erumai. This chieftain Erumai is referred to in a number of other poems, and by various other authors as the chieftain of the Vadukars. Nakkirar indicates in his poem that the territory of the Vadukar chief lay in the region of the river called Ayiri, and passing which river, one passes from the Tamil land into the land of Vadukas. Ayiri seems to be the equivalent of the Hagari river in the present Karnataka State (near Adoni of Andhra Pradesh) and which was a well known frontier region in later history between the Tamils and the powers to the north of them. 

Another ancient Tamil poet by name Kanakkayanar (probably the father of Nakkirar, since Nakkirar is often described as the son of Kanakkayanar) refers to northern Vengadam in Aham 27 and of the breed of elephants infesting its forests, in the course of a description of a Pandya and his famous port, the pearl producing Korkai. The other authors referring to Vengadam, are Tayam Kannan, known also as Tayangannan, who refers to Vengadam as belonging to Tondaiyar, and refers to the Country of Vadukar across the regions. Yet another poet, Kannan son of Kattur Kilar refers to Vengadam as belonging to Tiraiyan and describes a peculiar feature that the elephants of that region were being fed on the tender shoots of the bamboo. 

The last and the most important poet of these ancient Tamil poets, and probably the oldest among them is Mamulanar. He has seven poems in his anthology, in which directly or indirectly Vengadam is referred to. In poem 61 he refers to Vengadam as belonging to Pulli, the chieftain of the Kalavar, and mentions another important feature that Vengadam was famous for its festivals. This reference to festivals is very significant, since this is the only reference in ancient Tamil literature from which we can directly infer the existence of the temple to which these festivals could have been attributed. 

The passage actually occurs in poem 61 of the Ahananuru. Freely rendered the passage means that the chieftain of the Kalavar who are in the habit of handing over elephant tusks, bartering them for liquor prepared from paddy, and who wear anklets characteristic of warriors, was Pulli famed for the conquest of the land of the Malavar, and for great gifts to those who went to him. (Your lover) it is rarely possible will reconcile himself to stay away even if he got thereby Vengadam, the capital of that Pulli which is prosperous because of the festivals celebrated in it." The actual sense of the passage is that an imaginary lover who had departed from his sweetheart and travelled away in quest of wealth to distant parts, has tarried a little longer than he promised, and the consolation is offered to the heart-broken damsel that he might have been delayed, but that he would not stay away under any circumstances. To add emphasis to this statement, it is stated that even if, in his desire for the acquisition of wealth, he got possession of such a prosperous city as Vengadam, he would not stay behind. The point for notice here is that the fame of Vengadam in the estimation of Mamular was due, at least in part, to the great festivals which were celebrated in the place from time to time, meaning obviously the annual festivals which are now a feature of the great temple-city. 

In poem 115 and 281 the same author refers to Erumai of Kudanadu, and to Vadukars. During the course of a statement here about the invasion of the Mauryas to the south, the author says that they pressed the Vadukars forward before them, and passed through a tunnel in the hill, to which reference has already been made above. In poem 295 he refers to Tirupati as Pullikunram, the hill of the chieftain Pulli, and refers to his country as the region of the Vadugars entering which the spoken language changes. In poem 311 he refers to a good feature that the people of that area were accustomed to viz. to eat rice with the tamarind on the teak leaves. In poem 359 Pulli is referred to as one who is liberal in gifts. In verse 393 Pulli is again referred to as one the words of whose speech are long, which is a characteristic of some of these languages. There are other references by other authors which confirm one or other of these features, though they do not specifically refer to Vengadam as such. 

