+++
title = "05 POYGAI ALVAR"
+++

The first of these early alvars, Poygai Alvar is the author of the first *centum *of the last thousand of the Four Thousand in the prabhanda. He was notably a Vaishnava devotee but one who occupied a high place among the celebrities in Tamil literature. He has as many as twelve to fifteen direct references to Tirumala in the *centum *ascribed to him. He refers to this place as a sacred kshetra where Lord Vishnu had in his infinite grace manifested himself. Stanzas 5 and 74 clearly refer to the Lord and give description of the Lord's features and the weapons that he holds. Stanza 26 refers to Tirumala, the saving grace of which is enjoyed by the Gods themselves. In stanza 37 there is a more explicit reference to Vengadam as a place acceptable to the God who blew the beautiful white conch, which receives constant worship from people of great learning who offer daily worship with incense, lamp, holy water etc., and who came from all directions to offer worship here." There is a similar reference to Vengadam in stanza 39. Stanza 40 gives reference only to the secular feature of the place, where elephants are referred to as if threatened by the falling stars, in the belief that they were torches held by the Kuravars of that place. There is yet another reference in stanza 68. Stanza 76 refers to Tiruvengadam and, describes the God there as one who measured the earth (Vishnu-Trivikrama). Stanza 77 similarly refers to Vengadam where the Lord standing along with the other three places, Vinnagar, Vehka and Kovalur. The last reference to Tirumala is in stanza 99 where Lord Vishnu is spoken of as Eternal and being in the heart of everyone who is capable of thinking about him, and as habitually residing in the waters and on the hill of Vengadam. 

That at this stage the temple at Tirumala was a Vaishnavite temple is clear beyond doubt in stanza 28, 58, 64 and 65 which give evidence that the Alvar is devoted to Vishnu and none else. In stanza 53 there is a reference to the close association of the serpent Sesha or Ananta and Vishnu, as almost body and soul, which is the relation in which the Supreme is held in relation to all individual souls. Here Ananta is referred to as an umbrella for the Lord when he walks, a throne when he sits, a wooden platform or sandal when he stands and the eternal bed when he sleeps on the sea. This perhaps explains the symbolism of the snake which is sometimes said to be seen in parts of the body of the image of Lord Venkatesa at Tirumala. 

