+++
title = "07 PEY ALVAR"
+++

The next of the early Alvars, namely, Pey Alvar also refers to Vengadam in his verses. The first reference to Vengadam occurs in stanzas 14. In stanzas 26, 30 and 32 there are general references to Vengadam. He takes up the reference to Vengadam in 58 again, and comes up in the last line to the same references that the God in Vengadam is, "He who recovered the earth by the use of his acute intelligence," referring to his having outwitted Mahabali and got him to grant the three feet of earth. In stanza 59, the Alvar gives expression to his satisfaction that he has attained to the correct way of gaining salvation, since he attaches himself in devotion to Vishnu. Similarly stanzas 69, 70, 71, 72, 73 and 75 have also general references to Vengadam While 69 and 70 only refer to some general features, 71 repeats almost in the same terms incidents referred to in stanza 68. In 72 there is the specific statement that Vengadam is the residence of the prince among the young" (Ilam-Kumarar-Koman). Stanza 73 has a reference to Vengadam but in general terms; 75 has similarly a general reference to Tirumalai as the hill of Vishnu-Krishna (Ayan, shepherd). Stanza 76 states definitely that, if one should offer flowers and fold his hands in worship before the God at Vehka, no consequences of evil deeds would come to him, and that one need not stand amidst hills, or dip into water, or otherwise perform penance by standing amidst the five fires. Stanzas 77 to 88 recommend single-minded devotion to Vishnu as the sole efficient way of getting rid of evil and attaining to salvation. 89 refers to Vengadam and states clearly "it is the hill of the One who applied his lips to the flute emitting sweet music' (meaning young Krishna). Stanzas 90 to 93 are general as usual, and 94 states that the Alvar succeeded in recapturing Him, who stands, sits or lies down (in various holy places) and in his own heart by the process of lighting the lamp of contemplation. 

These three Alvars are called the first Alvars because they are considered to have been contemporary. Their hundred verses reveal such close similarity of features that on this ground alone one can hold that they were contemporaries and probably flourished at the same time. Being great devotees of Vishnu they refer to many places of Vishnu worship and among them Tirumala is referred to more frequently than any other. Hence these Alvars are regarded as having devoted their poems exclusively to Vengadam, by the commentators. 

These Alvars refer to the efficacies of the Vaidic ceremonies as of the highest importance. In the first centum Poygai Alvar states who will hereafter enter the gates of hell (Naraka)? Bolt its door without any compunction, because this land surrounded by the Jambu tree has now learned very well that the fact of Him who threw the calf to bring down the fruit of the wood-apple is the sole saviour." This seems intended to indicate the successful vogue this new teaching had attained to. That may give us an idea also of the actual age of its popularity, and the circumstances under which this movement attained the popularity that it actually did. 
