+++
title = "09 Tirumalisai Alvar"
+++

This Alvar had also composed 100 verses in honour of Vishnu. In stanzas 42 and 43 he mentions that both Brahma and Siva were among the worshippers at Vengadam. 

The first reference is in stanza 31. It is a bare reference to Vengadam along with the other Vaishnava place Kottiyur. There is a simple reference in stanza 39. There is a specific reference in 40 where it says that he was devoted to the God at Vengadam, who was constantly in his thought; “He is the beloved of Her who is described and quite extolled in the sciences, and I am inextricably caught in the net which is His feet." There is a very interesting reference in 41 where he refers again to the holy One at Vengadam having entered his mind by being in residence at Vengadam. In describing this hill at Vengadam there are two points that are brought out. The first is the mountain streams running down scattering pearls. By implication there is also the rattle of the running stream. Another kind of sound that is referred to as the normal feature of Vengadam is the sound that arises from the celebration of the festivals on Onam days. This asterism is of course sacred to Vishnu, and is, in some form, attached to Vishnu as almost the asterism of his birth (one that has no birth). But the festival on this asterism is, in some respects, peculiar to Tirumala, and is also usual in shrines where the deity installed is Srinivasa, (the abode of the Goddess Lakshmi), which is the ordinary familiar name of the God at Tirumala. The most sacred day in the year at Tirumala is this Sravana in the month of Purva-Bhadra. The next stanza has reference to Vengadam where the Alvar exhorts peoples to go and offer worship at Vengadam as it permanently destroys the evils of Karma, and offers as inducement the fact that the lotus-born Brahma and the three-eyed Siva alike placed lotus flowers at the feet of the God at Tirumala and worshipped Him. The next following stanza has a similar refe- rence to the worship offered by the same two Gods. Stanza 44 is particularly interesting, as, in making a reference to Vengadam, he exhorts younger people particularly to go and offer worship at Vengadam. 

The next reference to Vengadam is in stanza 90, although the reference is general. That is so far as this particular centum, of this Alvar is concerned. It comes out again and again in the course of this work of the Alvar that Tirumala was a place sacred to Vishnu, and the God installed in the temple there is Vishnu and nobody else. Mention is made of the presence of other Gods particularly Siva and Brahma as forming part of his body, but nonetheless it is clearly stated that the object of worship is Vishnu. 

