+++
title = "166"
+++
Both the Bhakta and Bhagavan Are Desireless
१६६ | तथैवोभयोः कामनाशून्यत्वं स्वयमेवाह (भा० ७।१०।५-६ ) -
ELSEWHERE, Prahlada himself speaks about the desirelessness of both Bhagavan and His devotee:
आशासानो न वै भृत्यः स्वामिन्याशिषमात्मनः ।
न स्वामी भृत्यतः स्वाम्यमिच्छन् यो राति चाशिषः ।। ४६६ ।। अहं त्वकामस्त्वद्भक्तस्त्वं च स्वाम्यनपाश्रयः ।
नान्यथे हावयोरर्थो राजसेवकयोरिव ॥ ४६७ ॥
One is certainly not a servant who seeks the fulfillment of per- sonal desires from his master. And one is not a true master who awards benedictions to his servant while seeking to pre- serve his mastery over him. I am Your unconditional servant (akāmaḥ tvad-bhaktah) and You are my utterly self-sufficient master (anapāśrayaḥ svāmi). In this respect, our relationship is not like that of a worldly king and his servant in which both have some selfish purpose to be served. (SB 7.10.5-6)1
स्पष्टम् ॥ प्रह्लादः श्रीनृसिंहदेवम् ॥
The meaning of this statement is clear.
1
āśāsāno na vai bhrtyaḥ svaminy asiṣam ātmanaḥ
na svāmi bhṛtyataḥ svamyam icchan yo rāti căsiṣaḥ
aham tv akāmas tvad-bhaktas tvam ca svāmy anapasrayaḥ nanyathehavayor artho raja-sevakayor iva
971
Commentary
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
IN THE material world, everybody has desires to fulfill. To satisfy one's desire, the help of others is required. Nobody can survive alone, and thus there is a need for society. People deal with each other to satisfy their desires. Nobody really likes to work only to fulfill someone else's desire. Therefore, in taking help from others, people must act as if their true intent is to help them. In this world, everyone is caught in a perpetual competition between exploiter and exploited. No one can escape it. It is for this reason that the law or dharma is introduced so that the strong will not exploit the weak. In the ideal sense, the law is meant to ensure the protection of the weak. The strong and powerful do not need the law.
Bhakti is a fundamentally different dimension of experience. In the realm of bhakti, both Bhagavan and His devotees desire noth- ing other than to render pleasing service to each other. Just as bhaktas consider themselves devoted and surrendered to Bhaga- van, so too Bhagavan considers Himself devoted and surrendered to His bhaktas. He Himself says that He is under the control of His devotee and does not feel or act independently (SB 9.4.63). Śrī Śuka addresses Bhagavan as the bhakta of His bhakta (SB 10.86.59). In this respect, they both compete to serve each other. Neither of them seeks anything in return for such service. It is as if the par- ticipants in the exchange were each delighted simply to be used for the other's advantage, prompting a reciprocal competition in self-abnegation. This is depicted in the verses spoken by Prahlada.
Bhagavan Narasimha wanted to offer Prahlada a boon, but Prahlada argued against it. In the material world, the employer is reluctant to offer benefits, and the employee has to fight for them, but in this case, Prahlada said to Narasimha, "You need nothing from me, and I want nothing from You. I am Your unconditional servant, not a merchant who is trying to procure favor from You. You are testing me to see whether I am a worthy devotee, and so You offer me boons. Please don't embarrass me in this way; I desire nothing from You." This is summed up in the following verse:
972
166 Both the Bhakta and Bhagavan Are Desireless
O Preceptor of all beings! It would not otherwise have been possi- ble for You, whose very essence is mercy, to try to allure me in this way. One who expects rewards for his service is not a servant, but only a merchant. (SB 7.10.4)2
2
nanyatha te khila-guro ghateta karunātmanaḥ yas ta äsiṣa äsäste na sa bhrtyaḥ sa vai vanik
973
