+++
title = "171"
+++
Eligibility for Karma, Jñana, and Bhakti
१७१ । तेष्वधिकारिहेतूनाह द्वाभ्याम् (भा० ११।२० ७-८ ) -
IN THE next two verses, Śrī Bhagavan points out the causes of eligibility for these three paths:
निर्विण्णानां ज्ञानयोगो न्यासिनामिह कर्मसु । तेष्वनिर्विण्णचित्तानां कर्मयोगश्च कामिनाम् ॥। ४७९ ।। यदृच्छया मत्कथादौ जातश्रद्धस्तु यः पुमान् ।
न निर्विण्णो नातिसक्तो भक्तियोगोऽस्य सिद्धिदः ॥ ४८० ॥
Out of these three methods, jñāna-yoga grants success to those who are disinterested in fruitive actions and who have thus abandoned them, whereas karma-yoga grants success to those who are not disinterested in fruitive actions and who still desire the fruits of such actions. However, for a person who, by great fortune, has acquired faith in hearing My narrations and other similar devotional acts, and who is neither completely indiffer- ent to sense objects nor overly attached to them, bhakti-yoga grants success. ( SB 11.20.7-8 ) 1
इह एषां मध्ये निर्विण्णानामैहिकपारलौकिकविषयप्रतिष्ठासुखेषु विरक्तचित्तानामत एव तत्साधनभूतेषु लौकिकवैदिककर्मसु न्यासिनां तानि त्यक्तवतामित्यर्थः । पदद्वयेन दृढजातमुमुक्षूणामित्यभिप्रेतम् । तेषां ज्ञानयोगः सिद्धिद इत्युत्तरेणान्वयः ।
1
nirvinṇānāṁ jñāna-yogo nyasinām iha karmasu
teşv anirvinna-cittānām karma-yogas ca kāminām
yadṛcchaya mat-kathadau jäta-śraddhas tu yaḥ puman na nirvinno nātisakto bhakti-yogo'sya siddhi-dah
996
171 Eligibility for Karma, Jñana, and Bhakti
The word iha, lit., "here," means "out of these three methods." The word nirviņṇānām, "for those who are disinterested" [in fruitive actions (karmasu)], refers to those whose minds have become disinclined toward the pleasures that are derived from sense objects (viṣaya) and prestige (pratiṣṭhā) related to this world and the next. As a consequence [of such indifference], they have become renunciants (nyāsinām), which means that they have given up the social and Vedic responsibilities that are the means to obtain the above-said pleasures. These two words - nirvinṇānām and nyasinām - are indicative of those in whom a staunch desire for liberation has sprouted (mumu- kṣuṇām). For them, jñāna-yoga grants success (siddhi-da). The word siddhi-da, appearing in the second of these two verses, is to be applied to the compound jñāna-yoga [as well as to karma-yoga, as shown below].
कामिनां तत्तत्सुखेषु रागिणामत एव तेषु तत्साधनभूतेषु कर्मस्वनिर्विण्णचित्तानां तानि त्यक्तुमसमर्थानां कर्मयोगः सिद्धिदस्तत्सङ्कल्पानुरूपः फलदः ।
The word käminām, lit., "for those with desire," refers to those who are attached to the pleasures of this world or the next. Con- sequently, they are anirvinna-cittānām, or those whose minds are not disinterested in the fruitive actions (karmasu) that are the means (sādhana-bhūteṣu) to obtain those pleasures and who are thus unable to give them up. For them, karma-yoga grants success (siddhi-da), meaning that it bestows the fruits that cor- respond to their initial intent (sankalpa).
अथ "ते वै विदन्त्यतितरन्ति च देवमायाम्" (भा० २ । ७ ।४६) इत्यादौ “तिर्यग्जना अपि " इत्यनेन भक्त्यधिकारे कर्मादिवज् जात्यादिकृतनियमातिक्रमात् ।
In examining the eligibility for bhakti discussed in the second of these two verses [SB 11.20.8], we may also consult verses such as this one:
Those who have been instructed in the moral integrity (sila) of those who are exclusively intent upon Bhagavan, the performer of extraordinary deeds, can certainly understand and cross
997
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
over Bhagavan's deluding potency, even if they are women, śūdras, hūņas, sabaras, sinful beings, or even lower species, such as animals and birds. So, what can be said of those who have received the Vedic knowledge and fixed it in their hearts? (SB 2.7.46)2
In this verse, the words tiryag-jana api, "even lower species," indicate that in regard to the eligibility to perform bhakti, there is no restriction based on birth or other similar criteria, as in the case of karma-yoga and jñāna-yoga.
श्रद्धामात्रं हेतुरित्याह " यदृच्छया” (भा० ११।८।२०) इति । यदृच्छया केनापि परमस्वतन्त्र- भगवद्भक्तसङ्गतत्कृपाजातमङ्गलोदयेन । यदुक्तम् "शुश्रूषोः श्रद्दधानस्य " ( भा० १।२।१६ ) इत्यादि ॥ श्रीभगवान् ॥
1
The sole cause of eligibility [for bhakti] is śraddhā, or “implicit faith," as stated by Bhagavan [in the second verse under exam- ination, SB 11.20.8]. The word yadṛcchaya, "by great fortune," means "by the auspicious fortune born of the grace issuing from the association of Bhagavan's devotees, who are supremely inde- pendent (parama-svatantra)" [in the matter of bestowing such grace]. This is spoken of by Saunaka:
O learned brahmanas, by visiting or dwelling in a holy place and by service to highly realized devotees, attraction for the narra- tions of Bhagavan Vasudeva comes about for a person endowed with firm faith, who is eager to hear. (SB 1.2.16)3
Commentary
BROADLY speaking, there are two types of people in this world — those who are attached to material sense pleasures and those who have lost interest in them. The majority of people belong to the first category. Sense pleasures may be related to objects desired in
3
3
te vai vidanty atitaranti ca deva-mayam stri-sudra-hüṇa-sabarā api papa-jīvāḥ yady adbhuta-krama-parāyaṇa-sila-sikṣās tiryag-janā api kim u śruta-dharaṇā ye suśrusoḥ śraddadhanasya vasudeva-katha-rucih
syan mahat-sevaya viprah punya-tirtha-nisevanät
998
171 Eligibility for Karma, Jñana, and Bhakti
this world or to those attainable in heaven, svarga. People who are attached to sense pleasures are unable to give up the idea of enjoy- ment. If they hear about bhakti or jñāna, they are unable to invest their faith in them.
Karma-yoga is suitable for such people, because it provides them the facility to satisfy their desires and ultimately to become detached from them. If karma-yoga did not have as its purpose the gradual awakening of detachment, then it would not be a yoga, or a means of turning one's intentful regard toward Bhagavan, bhagavat-sammukhya. Therefore, to be effective, karma-yoga must include karmarpanam, or the offering of actions to Bhagavan.
The varṇāśrama system was designed on the basis of this prin- ciple of karma-yoga leading to jñāna or bhakti. If worldly-minded people were not given facility for karma-yoga, they would turn into gross materialists, who would only exploit others and pollute the surrounding environment. This is more or less the situation of the world at present. About such materialists, Kṛṣṇa makes the follow- ing statement: "O Arjuna, one who in this life does not observe this creational cycle set into motion in the manner depicted leads a sin- ful life, delighting only in the senses. Such a person lives in vain" (GĪTA 3.16). Karma-yoga, on the other hand, gives one the facility to fulfill his or her material desires while maintaining a balance with
nature.
When a person develops detachment by the practice of karma- yoga or otherwise, he or she becomes eligible for jñāna-yoga. The goal of jñāna-yoga is immediate realization of the unqualified Abso- lute called Brahman. At this point, the person in question is no longer fit for karma-yoga, because he is without attachment to material pleasures. He is also ineligible for bhakti, because he has no faith in it. Those who have gone through the lengthy and assid- uous process of karma-yoga to arrive finally at the state of detach- ment are especially immune to bhakti. Their samskāras related to karma-yoga make them doubt the glories of bhakti, which is com- paratively simple. Only if they obtain the grace of a devotee can they acquire faith in bhakti and the sacred literature that discloses
it.
999I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
This grace is not dependent on anything material. The recipi- ent does not have to be born in a high-class family or belong to a particular nation, gender, race, and so on. This grace comes about by the supremely independent will of a highly realized devotee. Therefore, Kṛṣṇa uses the word yadṛcchaya, lit., "by chance," or "by divine will," to indicate this auspicious fortune, which is not dependent on prior karmas or any previous material condition.
Most people at present no longer practice karma-yoga, at least not in its original complete form, as established by the tradition. From this point of view, they have the advantage of being devoid of the samskāras related to karma-yoga that create doubts about the glories of bhakti. They can take to bhakti easily by the grace of a devotee. It is for this reason that it is said that in the age
of Kali, the prescribed process is chanting the names of Bhagavan (Padma Purāṇa, Pātāla-khaṇḍa 80.2-3). The next few anucchedas will explore the nature of devotional faith in greater depth.
Śrī Jiva Prabhu mentions at the end of his commentary on the principal verse of the previous anuccheda (SB 11.20.6) that bhakti is not a part of the karma-marga, as many on the jñana path claim. Their understanding is based on the following words of Śrī Kṛṣṇa:
O son of Pṛtha, I have spoken this wisdom to you in relation to sankhya-yoga [the path of detachment based upon the discern- ment between the body and self]. Now hear the same in rela- tion to karma-yoga [the path of selfless action offered to God]. Equipped with wisdom, you will be able to completely relinquish the shackles of karma. (GĪTĀ 2.39)5
And:
Śrī Bhagavan said: "O sinless Arjuna, I have previously enunci- ated two types of spiritual fixity that are available in this world- the jñānis, or sankhya-yogis, proceed by the path of knowledge
*harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam
15
hare rama hare krsna krsna krsneti mangalam evam vadanti ye nityam na hi tan badhate kaliḥ
esă te bhihitā sarkhye buddhir yoge tv imam śṛņu
buddhya yukto yaya partha karma-bandham prahasyasi Here, Kṛṣṇa is using the term sankhya-yogis for jñāna-yogīs.
1000
171 Eligibility for Karma, Jñana, and Bhakti
(jñāna-yoga), whereas the karma-yogis progress via the path of action without selfish motives (karma-yoga)." (GĪTĀ 3.3)"
In these two verses, Kṛṣṇa mentions only two paths - karma and jñāna. So how does bhakti fit into the Bhagavad Gita scheme? The answer is that in GITA 3.3, Kṛṣṇa does not state that there are no other paths besides the two He mentions. This contrasts with SB 11.20.6, cited in the previous anuccheda, in which He explic- itly declares that there are no other paths besides karma, jñāna, and bhakti. Rather, in GĪTĀ 3.3, He says that people of the world have faith either in the path of karma or jñāna. This implies that bhakti is not of this world and that one obtains it only by the grace of a superlative devotee, as indicated in SB 11.20.8 by the word yadṛcchaya. Therefore, in concluding His instructions to Arjuna in the Gītā, Krsna refers to bhakti as the foremost of all secrets (sarva-guhyatamam, GĪTĀ 18.64).
Another point to be considered in regard to SB 11.20.8 is as follows. It is often seen that Vaisnavas, such as Raghunatha Dāsa Gosvāmī, are highly renounced. In Caitanya Caritămṛta, the following generalization is made on this topic:
The complete absence of attachment (vairāgya) is prominent in the devotees of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, seeing which, Bhagavan Gaura is highly pleased. (Caitanya Caritamṛta 3.6.218)
Such being the case, what is the meaning of the words nati- nirvinna, "not excessively detached," in SB 11.20.8? The answer to this question is that detachment comes about in two ways. One is acquired by practice, such as by undertaking the path of karma- yoga, and the other ensues as a concomitant effect of bhakti. The devotees, however, are not ascetics in the manner of highly dis- interested jñāna-yogis. They do not renounce objects that can be
7
8
śri bhagavan uvāca
loke'smin dvi-vidha niṣṭhā pura proktā mayānagha
jñana-yogena sankhyānam karma-yogena yoginām mahaprabhura bhakta-ganera vairagya pradhana yāhā dekhi prita haya gaura bhagavan
1001
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
used in the service of Kṛṣṇa. To renounce such objects is called "worthless renunciation," phalgu-vairagya (BRS 1.2.256).
The devotees are detached from the objects of sense pleasure and partake of material objects only to the extent that is required for their service and personal maintenance. Their emphasis is on service to Krsna and not on renunciation (nirbandhah krsna- sambandhe, BRS 1.2.255). As a formal practice, renunciation is not part of bhakti but of jñana. Even Raghunatha Dasa Gosvāmi, who was greatly renounced, did not abandon his residence at Rådhā- kunda and wander about in the manner of an ascetic. Moreover, in his day, renunciation was very much honored in society, whereas bhakti, as an independent path, was not understood by the masses. Thus, to bring repute to bhakti, the followers of Mahaprabhu consciously adhered to the principles of renunciation.
1002
