+++
title = "09"

+++


9. But she begins with light; for thus some read in their text.

The 'but' has assertory force. 'Light' in the Sūtra means Brahman, in accordance with the meaning of the term as known from texts such as 'On him the gods meditate, the light of lights' (Br̥. Up. X, 4, 16); 'That light which shines beyond heaven' (Cḥ. Up. III, 13, 7). 'She begins with light' thus means 'she has Brahman for her cause.'--'For thus some read in their text,' i.e. because the members of one Śākhā, viz the Taittiriyas read in their

text that this 'ajā' has Brahman for her cause. The Mahānārāyaṇa-Upanishad (of the Taittirīyas) at first refers to Brahman abiding in the hollow of the heart as the object of meditation. 'Smaller than the small, greater than the great, the Self placed in the hollow of this creature'; next declares that all the worlds and Brahma and the other gods originated from that Self; and then says that there sprung from it also this ajā which is the cause of all 'The one ajā (goat), red, white and black, which gives birth to numerous offspring of the same shape, one aja (he-goat) loves and lies by her; another one forsakes her after having enjoyed her.' The subject-matter of the entire section evidently is to give instruction as to the whole aggregate of things other than Brahman originating from Brahman and thus having its Self in it; hence we conclude that also the ajā which gives birth to manifold creatures like her, and is enjoyed by the soul controlled by karman, while she is abandoned by the soul possessing true knowledge is, no less than vital airs, seas, mountains, &c., a creature of Brahman, and hence has its Self in Brahman. We then apply to the interpretation of the Śvetāśvatara-text the meaning of the analogous Mahānārayaṇa-text, as determined by the complementary passages, and thus arrive at the conclusion that the ajā in the former text also is a being having its Self in Brahman. That this is so, moreover, appears from the Śvetāśvatara itself. For in the early part of that Upanishad, we have after the introductory question, 'Is Brahman the cause?' the passage 'The sages devoted to meditation and concentration have seen the person whose Self is the divinity, hidden in its own qualities' (I, 1, 3); which evidently refers to the ajā. as being of the nature of a power of the highest Brahman. And as further on also (viz. in the passages 'From that the Māyin creates all this, and in this the other is bound up through Māya'; 'Know then Prakr̥ti to be Māyā and the Great Lord the ruler of Māyā'; and 'he who rules every place of birth,' V, 9-11) the very same being is referred to, there remains not even a shadow of proof for the assertion that the mantra under discussion

refers to an independent Prakr̥ti as assumed by the Sānkhyas.

But a further objection is raised, if the Prakr̥ti denoted by ajā begins with, i.e. is caused by Brahman, how can it be called ajā, i.e. the non-produced one; or, if it is non-produced, how can it be originated by Brahman? To this the next Sūtra replies.

