+++
title = "125"
+++
Bhakti Destroys Aprārabdha-karma
१२५ । अथ पापघ्नत्वे तावदप्रारब्धपापघ्नत्वमाह ( भा० ११।१४।१९ ) -
THE NEXT point to be considered is that bhakti destroys all sins. In this regard, Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa affirms that bhakti destroys aprārabdha sin [the unmanifest reactions that also perpetuate the inclination toward further sinful acts]:
यथाग्निः सुसमिद्धार्चिः करोत्येधांसि भस्मसात् । तथा मद्विषया भक्तिरुद्धवैनांसि कृत्स्रशः ॥ ३४४ ॥
O Uddhava, just as a blazing fire burns a pile of firewood to ashes, so too bhakti that has Me as its object destroys all sins in their entirety. (SB 11.14.19)1
टीका च - "पाकाद्यर्थमपि प्रज्वालितोऽग्निर्यथा काष्ठानि भस्मीकरोति तथा वागादिनापि कथञ्चिन् मद्विषया भक्तिः समस्तपापानीति । भगवानपि स्वभक्तिमहिमाश्चर्येण सम्बोधयति 'अहो उद्भव !' विस्मयं शृणु" इत्येषा ।
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments as follows: "Just as fire, although kindled for cooking or some other purpose [and not to burn wood], nonetheless turns wood into ashes, so too bhakti that has Me as its object, even if undertaken slightly (kathañcit) through acts of speech and so on (vāgādināpi), burns up all sins. Even Bhagavän Himself, marvelling at the glory of His bhakti, addressed
yathagniḥ susamiddharcih karoty edhamsi bhasmasāt tatha mad-visaya bhaktir uddhavaināmsi kṛtsnasaḥ
2 In the printed editions of Sridhara Svami's commentary, we find the words ragadinapi, "even if performed with attachment, and so on," in place of the
738
125 Bhakti Destroys Aprarabdha-karma
Uddhava: 'O Uddhava, just listen to this wonder."" [Here ends Śrīdhara Svāmi's comment.]
अत्र दृष्टान्ते " सुसमिद्धार्चिः" इतिवद् दान्तिके "सुदृढा" इत्याद्यनुक्तेः "अदृढापि" इत्यादि उन्नीयते । अत्रैव “कृत्स्रशः” इत्युक्तम् ।
I
In the first part of the above example, the word susamiddhārciḥ, "blazing," is used to qualify the word "fire" [the standard of comparison], but no corresponding adjective, such as "very firm" (sudṛdha), has been used to qualify bhakti [the subject of comparison, mentioned in the second part of the example]. This implies that even if devotion is not firm, it still destroys all sins. Even in this case, such bhakti destroys all sins "in their entirety" (kṛtsnaśaḥ).
पाद्मपातालखण्डस्थवैशाख्यमाहात्म्ये च
—
In the Vaisakha-mahatmya of the Patala-khanda from the Padma Purāṇa also, it is said:
यथाग्निः सुसमिद्धार्चिः करोत्येधांसि भस्मसात् । पापानि भगवद्भक्तिस्तथा दहति तत्क्षणात् ॥ ३४५ ॥
Just as a blazing fire turns wood into ashes, so too bhakti to Bhagavän immediately burns up all sins. (Padma Purana, Pātālakhanda 85.31)
यद्यपि "हरिरित्यवशेनाह पुमान् नार्हति यातनाः” (भा० ६।२।१५) इत्यादौ ।
words vāgādināpi, "even if performed through acts of speech and so on." In Bhakti Sandarbha, Jiva Gosvāmi takes the latter reading as being more appropriate to the context. His intent here is to show the power of bhakti to destroy sins in their entirety, pointing out that it can do so even if performed outwardly or to a slight extent through normal bodily functions, such as speech. In this way, he also indirectly shows that the true purpose of speech is to glorify Bhagavan and not to be engaged in idle talk, just as fire is meant to serve a utilitarian purpose and not simply to burn wood. As the burning of wood is incidental to the fire's intended purpose, so too the destruction of sins is incidental to bhakti's true purpose.
3
yathagnih susamiddharciḥ karoty edhamsi bhasmasät
pāpāni bhagavad-bhaktis tathā dahati tat-kṣaṇāt
739
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
In connection with the above discussion, the following verse is to be considered:
Whether falling, stumbling, broken, bitten, afflicted, or beaten, if one even helplessly utters the name "Hari," he is no longer fit for the torments of hell. (SB 6.2.15)*
लिङादिप्रत्ययविरहेऽपि "पूषा प्रपिष्टभागः” (यजुः) “यदाग्नेयोऽष्टाकपालो भवति” (यजुः) इत्यादिवद् विधित्वमस्ति ।
115
In this verse, even though there is no direct use of an imperative or injunctive verb form, an injunction is nevertheless implied, just as it is in the following two Yajur Veda statements: "Pūṣā receives the portion of the oblation that is ground into a paste,' and, "The oblation offered in eight pots is for the deity known as Agni." [Here, the implication is that the oblation made into a paste should be offered to Puşă, and the oblation divided into eight pots should be offered to Agni.]
HTO 21814-
तस्माद् भारत सर्वात्मा भगवान् ईश्वरो हरिः ।
श्रोतव्यः कीर्तितव्यश्च स्मर्तव्यश्चेच्छताभयम् ॥ ३४६ ॥
इत्यादौ साक्षाद् विधिश्रवणमप्यस्ति ।
Elsewhere, we do also find direct injunctions, such as in the following verse:
4
Therefore, O descendant of Bharata, a person seeking ultimate release from fear [i.e., liberation] should hear about, glorify, and remember Bhagavan Hari, who is the Supreme Self and Regulator of all. (SB 2.1.5)"
patitaḥ skhalito bhagnaḥ sandaṣṭas tapta āhataḥ
harir ity avaśenäha pumän närhati yātanaḥ
5
puşă prapiṣṭa-bhāgaḥ
6
yad agneyo'sta-kapālo bhavati
7 tasmad bharata sarvātmā bhagavan isvaro hariḥ
śrotavyaḥ kirtitavyaś ca smartavyas cecchatabhayam
740
125 Bhakti Destroys Aprarabdha-karma
“तस्मात्” इति हेतुनिर्देशश्चाकरणे दोषं क्रोडीकरोति तथापि विधिसापेक्षेयं न भवतीति तथाभूतस्वभावाग्निलक्षणवस्तुदृष्टान्तेन सूचितम् ।
In the latter verse, the word tasmat, "therefore," implies that for the reasoning specified in the leadup verses (hetu-nirdeśa), one is at fault if he fails to act on the injunction. Even so, bhakti is not dependent on any injunction. The fact that bhakti is of such nature has been indicated [in SB 11.14.19] by comparing its potency to that of a [potent] substance (vastu), signified here by fire [which burns even if contacted inadvertently].
अत एव “यानास्थाय नरो राजन्” (भा० ११ १२ १३५) इत्यादिकमपि दृश्यते ।
Therefore, we also find statements such as the following:
O King, having taken to the path [of bhāgavata-dharma, or bhakti], a person is never deviated [by obstacles]. Even if he were to run along with eyes closed, he would neither slip nor fall from the path. (SB 11.2.35)
"सुसमिद्धार्चिः" इत्यनेन साधनान्तरसापेक्षत्वमशक्यसाध्यत्वं विलम्बितत्वं च निराकृतम् । तदेव व्यक्तं पाद्मात् " तत्क्षणात्” इति ॥ श्रीभगवान् ॥
8
The comparison to "a blazing fire" (susamiddharcir agnih) negates any possibility of bhakti being dependent on any other means, of its being incapable of delivering its result, or of there being any delay in its effectiveness. This was specifically pointed out by the words "in that very moment" (tat-kṣaṇāt) in the above-cited verse from the Padma Purana.
Commentary
EVERY LIVING BEING in the material creation is under the law of karma. This means that we must face the results of all actions we perform. These results are primarily of two types, namely, wellbeing and suffering. Well-being is the result of meritorious action,
yan asthāya naro rajan na pramadyeta karhicit
dhavan nimilya vā netre na skhalen na pated iha
7411 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
which is called punya, or "virtuous deeds." Suffering is the outcome of unmeritorious action, which is called papa, or "sin." The Pūrva-mīmāmsä School asserts that adherence to the Vedic injunctions engenders piety, whereas to neglect a compulsory duty or to engage in acts forbidden by the Veda results in sin. Both of these types of reactions bind the living beings in a karmic cycle.
Although karma is generated at the moment of action, it may not deliver its result immediately. Actions that do not do so must be stored somewhere. Karma means action, which by its very nature must come to an end, so how is it possible to "store" it? What is being stored is in fact something intermediary that lies between the action and its result. This is also called karma, or more technically, adṛsta ("unseen," i.e., that which is beyond the reach of observation or cognition, "especially, the merit or demerit attaching to conduct in one state of existence and its corresponding reward or punishment in another," Monier-Williams), apurva ("a consequence not immediately preceded by an apparent cause," Monier-Williams), or daiva ("destiny" or "chance").
It is this intermediary karma, or fate, that results in happy or miserable conditions. This intermediary karma could be either meritorious or unmeritorious. An individual's total stock of intermediary karma is called sañcita-karma, "accumulated karma." The action that a person is performing at present is called kriyamāṇakarma. Prior to birth, a certain amount of residual karma from a person's accumulated stock is selected that will fructify in the impending birth. This karma is called prärabdha-karma, or "fructifying karma." The remaining portion of karma is called aprārabdhakarma, or "dormant karma." This karma will not come to fruition in the present life.
In this anuccheda, Śrī Jīva shows that bhakti destroys aprārabdhakarma, or the portion of karma that lies dormant. The intent of bhakti is to please Bhagavan and not to destroy aprārabdha-karma, yet the latter occurs automatically by the power of bhakti. This means that aprārabdha-karma is no longer a factor in determining a devotee's destination after giving up the present body.
742
125 Bhakti Destroys Aprarabdha-karma
In the principal verse of this anuccheda [SB 11.14.19], bhakti's intrinsic capacity to incinerate aprārabdha sins is compared to the burning power of fire. Although the word "fire" is modified in the verse by the adjective "blazing" (susamiddharci), the word bhakti has no such corresponding modifier. According to Śrī Jīva, this implies that even a mild form of bhakti conducted primarily through the external organs of speech and so on has the effect of burning aprārabdha-karma to ashes.
Through the analogy of fire, Śrī Jiva brings out an additional aspect of bhakti's power to remove sins. He begins by quoting a verse (SB 6.2.15) taken from the story of Ajamila, who uttered the name of his son Nārāyaṇa at the time of death. In doing so, Ajamila's intent was not to invoke Bhagavan Nārāyaṇa but to call for his son. Even this incidental or unintended utterance of Bhagavan's name made him free of sin, just as fire burns even if contacted unintentionally. To emphasize this glory of the holy name, the Viṣṇudūtas spoke the verse in question to the messengers of Yama. Śrīdhara Svāmi's expanded translation of the verse is as follows:
On being cast out from a wealthy home, having stumbled along the road, having broken his limbs, on being bitten by a snake, afflicted by fever, or made to suffer a beating, if a person in any of these conditions utters the name "Hari," even out of a feeling of sheer helplessness, he is no longer fit for the torments of hell. (SB 6.2.15)
Here, Śrī Jiva points out that there is no injunction in this verse to utter the name of Bhagavan. In scripture, injunctions are generally expressed through use of the vidhi-lin conjugation, the optative or prescriptive mood. There are other ways of conveying an injunction, as summarized in the following verse:
The following are five expressions that consistently signify an injunction throughout the Vedas: "one should do" (kuryat), "it should be done" (kriyeta), "it is a task to be done," i.e., "a duty" (kartavya), "it should be so" (bhavet), and "it must be so" (syāt). (Sabara-bhāṣya on Jaimini-sutra 1.3.1)9
kuryat kriyeta kartavyam bhavet syad iti pañcamam etat syat sarva-vedeșu niyatam vidhi-lakṣaṇam
743
1 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
None of these applications are present in SB 6.2.15. In the latter verse, the verb aha, "uttered," does not have a case ending (i.e., a final syllable) that corresponds to the conjugation of the potential mood (vidhi-lin), which is used when an injunction is intended. From this, it might be concluded that the Viṣṇudutas' statement does not carry the force of an injunction. According to the Purvamīmāmsā School, only if an action is prescribed in the Veda can it award piety on being executed. Without being specified as an injunction, why should the chanting of Bhagavan's name give rise to piety or nullify sins? In reply, it should be understood that the injunctive force is to be inferred in the case of a matter of great importance, as noted in the following verse: "When the importance of a matter is understood, even in the absence of any direct injunction, an injunction is to be assumed."10
An example of this was given at the very beginning of Bhakti Sandarbha, where Śrī Jīva said that simply by informing a poor man that a treasure is buried somewhere in his house, there is an unstated injunction for him to start digging. In SB 6.2.15, the Viṣṇudūtas affirm that even by inadvertently uttering the name "Hari," one is no longer a candidate for suffering, so the natural implication is that one should intentfully utter His name.
Śrī Jīva gives two examples from the Yajur Veda of direct statements that carry injunctive force: "The portion of the oblation that is ground into a paste is meant for the deity known as Pūṣā [because he has no teeth]," and, "The oblation offered in eight pots is meant for the deity known as Agni." The implied sense of these two statements is that the oblation made into a paste should be offered to Pūṣā, and the oblation in eight pots should be offered to Agni.
In spite of the fact that a direct injunction is absent in SB 6.2.15, there are injunctions found elsewhere that stipulate the necessity of chanting the names of Bhagavan and engaging in bhakti. These also include warnings that by neglecting to do so, negative repercussions will ensue. Śrī Jīva gives an example of such an injunction in SB 2.1.5. In this verse, the causative pronoun tasmat, "therefore," carries the sense of compulsion, or what must be done for the
māhātmyāvagater vidhy-abhave'pi vidhih kalpyah
10
744
125 Bhakti Destroys Aprärabdha-karma
reason just specified in the preceding verse or verses. In spite of such directives, bhakti is not in any way dependent on injunctions. This nature of bhakti has been indicated in the principal verse of this anuccheda (SB 11.14.19) by comparing its power to the burning potency of fire, which burns regardless of how an object comes in contact with it. This means that chanting Bhagavan's name and the other acts of bhakti do not require an injunction to be effective. Bhakti is potent in and of itself.
In contrast to bhakti, the ritual acts prescribed in the karmakända, such as the agnihotra sacrifice, do not have any power of their own to give rise to piety. The power to do so is derived from the fact that such actions are the orders of the Veda, which is directly the word of Bhagavan. Otherwise, if any such act were not enjoined in the Veda, its performance would not generate any beneficial karma. In fact, because the Vedic injunctions are the words of Bhagavan, the execution of them entails a type bhakti, and thus the power in karma-kända is derived from bhakti, which is independently potent. From this, it is clearly evident that bhakti is not dependent on any injunction. This is the implied meaning behind the example of fire. As fire burns fuel naturally, so too bhakti burns karma by its innate constitution.
On this basis, it can be understood from sage Kavi's statement in SB 11.2.35 that bhakti is comparable to a wide and smooth royal highway. Even if one were to run on it with closed eyes, he would not stumble. In this statement, the two eyes represent the Veda and Smrti scriptures. Proceeding with eyes closed means not being conversant with these two or not adhering to them. In other words, even if one engages in bhakti unknowingly or incidentally, the result will still be obtained. The comparison to a blazing fire also implies that bhakti is not dependent on anything else and that there is no delay in burning sins, just as a blazing fire needs no external help to burn and does so without delay.
745
