+++
title = "126"
+++
Bhakti Destroys Sins
1
१२६ । तथा च (भा० ६ |१|१५ ) -
CONTINUING the discussion of how bhakti destroys sins, we may consider this statement of Śrī Suka:
केचित् केवलया भक्त्या वासुदेवपरायणाः ।
अघं धुन्वन्ति कार्त्स्न्येन नीहारमिव भास्करः ॥ ३४७ ॥
And some, who are exclusively intent upon Vasudeva, destroy all their sins in their entirety through unalloyed devotion, just as the sun dissipates the morning fog . ( SB 6.1.15 ) 1
टीका च - "केचिदित्यनेनैवम्भूता भक्तिप्रधाना विरला इति दर्शयति । केवलया तपआदिनिरपेक्षया 'वासुदेवपरायणाः' इति नाधिकारिविशेषणमेतत् किन्तु अन्येषामश्रद्धया तत्राप्रवृत्तेरर्थात् तेष्वेव पर्यवसानादनुवादमात्रम्" इत्येषा ।
Śrīdhara Svāmi comments: "The word kecit, 'some,' shows that such individuals, who consider bhakti as preeminent, are rare. The words kevalayā bhaktyā, through unalloyed devotion,' mean 'by devotion alone,' without recourse to austerities or any other process. The compound vāsudeva-parāyanāh, 'who are exclusively intent upon Vasudeva,' is not used here as a qualifier (viśesana) of the eligible practitioner (adhikārī ). Rather, because others, due to an absence of faith, do not engage in
kecit kevalaya bhaktyä vasudeva-parāyaṇaḥ
agham dhunvanti kärtsnyena nihāram iva bhaskarah
746
126 Bhakti Destroys Sins
unalloyed bhakti, implying that such engagement can be applicable only to the eligible practitioners, this compound is used merely as reiteration of the subject (anuvada-mātra)." [Here ends Śrīdhara Svami's comment.]
अत्र भास्करो हि केवलेन स्वरश्मिना स्वभावत एव नीहारं निःशेषं धुनोति । न तदर्थं प्रयत्नतस्तथा वासुदेवपरायणा अपि भक्त्येति ज्ञेयम् ॥
In this verse, the implication is that the sun, by its very nature (svabhāvata eva), completely dissipates fog by its own rays alone. To accomplish this, no effort is required. Similarly, it is to be understood that the devotees who are exclusively intent upon Vasudeva (vāsudeva-parāyaṇaḥ) destroy all their sins simply by bhakti.
Commentary
ŚRI JIVA continues the theme of how bhakti destroys sins. A major part of karma-kända deals with the topic of atonement (prāyaścitta) for one's sinful acts. Śrī Jīva stresses the fact that in bhakti there is no need of atonement. First of all, a devotee does not engage in sinful acts, because his willing capacity (iccha-sakti) is directed toward pleasing Kṛṣṇa and not toward the fulfillment of material desires. But if he should commit a sinful act unintentionally or because of past habits, there is no separate atonement prescribed to counteract the sinful act. Bhakti itself is powerful enough to purify the practitioner, just as the sun dispels fog. This is the very nature of bhakti. This continues in the same vein as the previous anuccheda, where bhakti's power to burn sin was compared to fire, which burns fuel in its entirety without conditions, as its natural characteristic.
In the first chapter of the Sixth Canto, the verses leading up to the principal verse of this anuccheda (SB 6.1.15) discuss the topic of atonement. Śrī Sukadeva first makes the following points:
Freedom from sin through works [i.e., through acts of atonement] is certainly not acknowledged as final, because the person engaged
747
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
in them is bound by ignorance. Hence, the real atonement is in knowledge. (SB 6.1.11)2
Through penances, celibacy, mental regulation, sense control, charity, truthfulness, purity, self-restraint, and religious duties [such as japa and so on], the wise, who are well-versed in dharma and endowed with faith, destroy even great sins committed in body, speech, and thought, just as fire burns a bamboo thicket. (SB 6.1.13-14)3
Here the qualified practitioner, who wishes to be rid of his sins, is described as being wise or forbearing (dhira), well-versed in dharma (dharmajña), and endowed with faith (śraddhayānvita). In the verse under discussion (SB 6.1.15), however, Śrīdhara Svāmī comments that the compound vasudeva-parāyaṇaḥ, "those who are exclusively intent upon Vasudeva," is not a qualifier of the eligible practitioner (adhikari). Even though this compound is syntactically connected to its antecedent, the pronoun "some" (kecit), it is not used in a restrictive sense to qualify those engaged in unalloyed devotion (kevala-bhakti). In other words, it is not necessary to specify that those engaged in pure devotion are exclusively intent upon Bhagavan, because others, who lack faith, do not perform bhakti in any case. Only those who are devoted engage in bhakti. Consequently, this compound is used merely as reiteration of the subject (anuvāda).
Grammatically speaking, a modifier (viseṣana) is used to distinguish one object from others of the same class. When we say, "a blue lotus," then the modifier "blue" distinguishes this particular lotus from others that are not blue, such as red or white lotuses. But if all lotuses were only blue in color, there would be no purpose served by using the word "blue" with lotus.
2
3
For example, we do not generally say, "a white conch," because
karmanā karma-nirharo na hy atyantika isyate
avidvad-adhikâritvāt prāyaścittaṁ vimarśanam tapasă brahmacaryena samena ca damena ca
tyāgena satya-saucābhyam yamena niyamena vā deha-vag-buddhijam dhira dharmajñaḥ śraddhayānvitāḥ kṣipanty agham mahad api venu-gulmam ivānalaḥ
748
126 Bhakti Destroys Sins
all conches are white. But if we should use the expression "white conch," then the adjective "white" is applied only in a descriptive sense and not to distinguish the conch from those of other (hypothetical) color. Similarly, if the compound vasudeva-parāyaṇa were used as a modifier of a devotee, it would signify that there are also some devotees who are not vasudeva-parāyaṇa, but such is never the case. Śrīdhara Svāmi therefore comments that this compound is merely confirming the universal characteristic of all devotees. The implication of his comment is that bhakti destroys sin without depending on any qualification of a devotee.
749
