+++
title = "136"
+++
Action Related to Bhagavan Is Nirguna
१३६ । एवं वासमात्रस्य तादृशत्वमुक्त्वा सर्वासामेव तत्क्रियाणामाह (भा० ११ । २५।२६) -
HAVING THUS stated that the mere act of residing in a temple is nirguna, Bhagavan affirms that all actions related to Him are similarly nirguna:
सात्त्विकः कारकोऽसङ्गी रागान्धो राजसः स्मृतः । तामसः स्मृतिविभ्रष्टो निर्गुणो मदपाश्रयः ॥ ३७४ ।।
An unattached agent is sättvika, one blinded by attachment is rajasika, and one whose discrimination has been altogether lost is tāmasika; but the agent who works under My shelter is nirguna. (SB 11.25.26)1

अत्र च क्रियायामेव तात्पर्यं न तदाश्रये द्रव्ये । सात्त्विककारकस्य शरीरादिकं हि गुणत्र- यपरिणतमेव ॥
Here again, the import [of the categorization as sättvika and so on] is specifically in regard to the actions of the performer and not to the materials or instruments through which such actions are carried out. This is so because the body and so on of a sättvika agent are still products of the three gunas.
1 sättvikah karako'sangi rāgāndho rajasah smrtah
tamasah smrti-vibhrasto nirguno mad-apāśrayaḥ
806
Commentary
136 Action Related to Bhagavan Is Nirguna
AFTER categorizing the acts of residing in different places accord- ing to the gunas, Śrī Kṛṣṇa now assesses action according to the motive of the agent. Although the verse attributes the gunas to the different agents of action, Śrī Jiva comments that it is the actions themselves and not the agents that possess these qualities. Any action performed by an agent occurs within, or by means of, the body of the agent. Thus, it is the body presided over by the ātmā that is the actual agent or doer (kāraka). The ātmā by its very nature is beyond the gunas and, hence, a nondoer.
It is clear from the verse that it is the intention of the performer that determines the gunika nature of an action. The body is consti- tuted of the three gunas, and it is the intention of the performer that is superimposed onto the action. On this basis, the agent is said to be under these same gunas. Thus, when Kṛṣṇa says that a particular agent is sättvika, it means that his action is sättvika. This interpretation of Krsna's statement is in accord with the following Nyaya principle of Sanskrit sentence analysis, "An injunction or prohibition that would normally be applied to a qualified substan- tive [i.e., to the subject of the verb] is applicable to the [subject's] qualifier instead, if a contradiction or obstruction is involved in applying it to the substantive.""
For example, in the sentence sikhi dhvastaḥ, "The man with dreadlocks is destroyed," it is the man qualified by dreadlocks who is the substantive. The verb dhvastaḥ, "is destroyed," would nor- mally be applied to him. But if the man is seen to be alive, then the verb should be applied to the qualifier and not the substantive. The statement should then be taken to mean that the man's dreadlocks have been shorn from his head. Similarly, in Krsna's statement, since the doer of the act is understood to be the body and not the ātmā, the gunika attribution pertains to the act itself and not the agent. This is Śrī Jiva's point. In the Gītā, we find the following parallel classification of agency according to the gunas:
2
sa-viseṣaṇe vidhi-nisedhau viseṣaṇam upasankramataḥ sati visesye badhe.
807
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
An agent who is free from attachment to action and its fruit, devoid of egotism, endowed with fortitude and enthusiasm, and unaffected by success or failure, is considered to be sättvika. An agent who is attached to work, desirous of the fruit of action, greedy for sense objects, violent by nature, unclean, and prone to happiness and grief, is said to be räjasika. And an agent who acts improperly, who is uncultured, arrogant, deceitful, overbear- ing, indolent, despondent, and procrastinating, is called tamasika. (GĪTĀ 18.26-28)3
1 mukta-sango'naham-vadi dhṛty-utsaha-samanvitaḥ siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikäraḥ karta sättvika ucyate rāgi karma-phala-prepsur lubdho himsātmako'suciḥ harsa-sokānvitaḥ kartā rājasaḥ parikirtitah ayuktaḥ prakṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ satho naiskṛtiko'lasah visādi dirgha-sutri ca kartā tāmasa ucyate
808
