+++
title = "154"
+++
Pretentiousness Impedes the Reception
of Grace
१५४ | यथैव भगवद्भक्ता अप्यकुटिलात्मनोऽज्ञाननुगृह्णन्ति न तु कुटिलात्मनो विज्ञानिति दृश्यते । यथा ( भा० ११।५।४-५ ) -
SIMILARLY, the devotees of Bhagavan also bless those who are unpretentious (akuțila) yet devoid of knowledge (ajña) but not those who are pretentious (kuțila) and erudite (vijña), as Śrī Camasa informed King Nimi:
दूरे हरिकथाः केचिद् दूरे चाच्युतकीर्तनाः ।
स्त्रियः शूद्रादयश्चैव तेऽनुकम्प्या भवादृशाम् ।। ४४२ ।। विप्रो राजन्यवैश्यौ वा हरेः प्राप्ताः पदान्तिकम् | श्रौतेन जन्मनाथापि मुह्यन्त्याम्नायवादिनः ।। ४४३ ।।
All those women, sudras, and others who are bereft of the opportunity to hear the narrations of Bhagavan Hari or to sing the glories of Bhagavan Acyuta [Śrī Krsna] deserve to be blessed by devotees like you. On the other hand, the brahmanas, kṣatri- yas, and vaisyas, despite having full facility to attain the lotus feet of Bhagavan Hari by virtue of their exalted birth and initi- ation into the study of the Vedas, are bewildered by the flowery language of the Vedas [that promote fruitive ritual acts for the attainment of heaven]. (SB 11.5.4-5)1
düre hari-kathāḥ kecid dure cacyuta-kirtanāḥ striyaḥ śudradayas caiva te'nukampya bhavadṛśam vipro rajanya-vaisyau va hareḥ präptāḥ padāntikam śrautena janmanäthäpi muhyanty ämnaya-vadinaḥ
915
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
टीकाच - " तत्र येऽज्ञास्ते भवद्विधानामनुग्राह्या इत्याह- दूर इति । ज्ञानलवदुर्विदग्धा- स्त्वचिकित्स्यत्वादुपेक्ष्या इत्याशयेनाह - विप्र इति" इत्येषा ॥ श्रीचमसो निमिम् ॥
Śrīdhara Svāmi also comments: "In the first of these two verses, sage Camasa declares that out of the various divisions of human beings mentioned in the two preceding verses [SB 11.5.2-3, Anuccheda 64], those who are devoid of knowledge (ajña) should be favored by devotees like King Nimi. But by the second verse, he intends to say that those who are consumed with pride due to their petty knowledge (jñāna-lava-durvidagdha) are to be avoided, because they are incurable."
Commentary
IN THIS ANUCCHEDA, Śrī Jiva continues to elaborate on the first of the five primary effects of aparādha, namely, hypocrisy or pre- tension (kautilya). In his instructions to King Nimi, Śrī Camasa says that simple-hearted people should be blessed, because it is useless to bless the crooked. Although erudite (vijña), those who are pretentious (kutila) will not accept the blessings of devotees. Rather, they may mock such blessings, if not explicitly, then at least within their minds. This is because they consider themselves very clever. Śrīdhara Svāmī calls them incurable (acikitsya), because they have fallen prey to the fatal disease known as the pride of petty knowledge, jñāna-lava-durvidagdha. In reference to them, King Bhartṛhari makes the following statement:
A simpleton is easily pleased, and a person of exceptional wis- dom is pleased even more easily. But a person who is consumed with pride due to their petty knowledge (jñāna-lava-durvidagdha) cannot be satisfied even by Brahma himself. (Niti-śataka 3)2
This is a very common disease in modern times. Even among those who take to the spiritual path, many are plagued with this disease. This is largely due to the fact that knowledge is now freely
2 ajñaḥ sukham aradhyah sukhataram aradhyate viseṣajñaḥ
jääna-lava-durvidagdham brahmapi tam naram na rañjayati
916
154 Pretentiousness Impedes the Reception of Grace
available through the cyber media. There is nothing wrong with this in principle except that people tend to read selectively. They accept whatever agrees with their concept of truth and reject or misinterpret the rest. The readers, however, are unaware of this unconscious bias and think that they are situated in knowledge. Such knowledge, however, induces a sense of smugness. As a result, people no longer feel the need to study under a teacher by submitting to him or her in humility. Even those people who accept a guru do not necessarily have much faith in him. Cyber media is the real guru for them. They acquire half-baked knowledge and then argue relentlessly.
A point to be clarified here is that sage Camasa mentioned women and sūdras on a par in terms of being barred from certain social privileges. From the modern perspective, this notion may appear offensive both to women and to any human being who might be categorized as lower caste. It must be borne in mind, however, that this statement was made strictly in regard to a social and moral view that was prevalent long ago. The intention of the speaker is not to disparage women or anyone else. It is very impor- tant to understand the intent of the speaker and not derive the wrong understanding. On the pretext of this social context, what sage Camasa in reality implied was that these people were hum- ble and simple-hearted (akuțila) and deserved to be blessed. Thus, although they appeared outwardly to be lower in social status, they possessed a higher qualification that far exceeded the relevance of social rank.
It is this qualification alone that Jīva Gosvāmi is highlighting through Camasa's statement. Here, unpretentiousness (akuțilatva) is equated with simplicity of heart and the readiness to be blessed. with truth teachings regarding Bhagavan, while pretentiousness (kuțilatva) is equated with pride in petty knowledge (jñāna-lava- durvidagdha) and a consequent resistance to such blessings. The lat- ter represents a major obstacle to be overcome by the practitioner.
From the modern world-centric moral view, the categorization of human beings according to caste on the basis of birth alone is an unjust imposition. Even in present-day India, śūdras are not to be
917
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
found in the original sense spoken of in Camasa's statement, since the whole varṇāśrama system has collapsed. Moreover, if you call someone a sudra, you can be put behind bars, because in India, this is an unbailable offense. Even where caste considerations are still to some extent operative, those who would be designated as sūdras are no longer barred from hari-katha or hari-kirtana, as mentioned in the verse. In the past, such restrictions were upheld, but now everyone is free to participate in these activities.
In the second of the two verses spoken by Camasa (SB 11.5.5), the word amnaya-vādī refers to people who are attached to the karma- kanda division of the Vedas and consider it as the be-all and end-all of their lives. They are described by Kṛṣṇa in the Gītā:
O Arjuna, the unwise, who are attached to the evanescent goals described in the Vedas, who claim that the Vedas are concerned with nothing other than this, who are full of material desires, and who are intent upon the attainment of heaven, utter the flow- ery words of the Vedas concerning various special rites that are directed toward the acquisition of pleasure and power and which result in rebirth and perpetuation of the cycle of karma. For those whose minds are carried away by such flowery words and who are firmly attached to pleasure and worldly power, the intellect cannot become resolutely established in transcognitive awareness [of Paramesvara]. (GĪTĀ 2.42-44)3
In the next anuccheda, Śrī Jīva Prabhu will discuss aśraddha, or "faithlessness," the second of the five primary effects of aparādha.
918
yām imām puspitām vacam pravadanty avipascitaḥ veda-vada-rataḥ pārtha nanyad astiti vadinaḥ kāmātmānaḥ svarga-para janma-karma-phala-pradām kriya-višesa-bahulam bhogaiśvarya-gatim prati bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ tayāpahṛta-cetasām vyavasayatmika buddhiḥ samadhau na vidhiyate
