+++
title = "155"
+++
Faithlessness Is Symptomatic of Aparādha
१५५ । अथाश्रद्धा - दृष्टे श्रुतेऽपि तन्महिमादौ विपरीतभावनादिना विश्वासाभावः । यथा दुर्योधनस्यैव विश्वरूपदर्शनादावपि ।
NOW WE WILL discuss aśraddha, or "faithlessness" [the second of the five primary effects of aparādha]. Even after witnessing and hearing about the glories of bhakti, if one still maintains a lack of conviction (viśvāsa-abhāva) about those glories due to harboring various types of doubt, such as contrary opinions and so on (viparita-bhāvanādi), this is known as aśraddha, or "absence of faith." An example of this is seen in the case of Duryodhana, who did not accept Śrī Kṛṣṇa's Godhood [Parameśvaratā] even after seeing Him manifest His universal form.
अत एव यथा “ आपन्नः संसृतिं घोरां यन् नाम विवशो गृणन् " ( भा० १११११४) इत्यादिशौनकस्य “दन्ता गजानां कुलिशाग्रनिष्ठुराः (वि० पु० १।१७।४४) इति श्रीप्रह्लादस्यानुभव- सिद्धं न तथा सर्वेषाम् ।
Therefore, the realized experience of Śrī Śaunaka and that of Śrī Prahlada are not the experience of everyone. Saunaka's conviction is expressed in these words:
1
See also Anuccheda 16 for further discussion of the different types of doubt.
919
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
A person entangled in the terrifying state of temporal existence, who, even out of a sense of sheer helplessness, utters the name of He whom Fear itself fears, is immediately delivered from that temporal state. (SB 1.1.14)2
ईदृशमानुषङ्गिकं फलं तु शुद्धभक्तैर्भगवन्महिमख्यापनेच्छा यदि स्यात् तदैवेष्यते न तु स्वरक्षणाय स्वमहिमदर्शनाय वा । यथैवोक्तम् (वि० पु० १ १७ । ४४ ) -
दन्ता गजानां कुलिशाग्रनिष्ठुराः शीर्णा यदेते न बलं ममैतत् । महाविपत्पातविनाशनोऽयं जनार्दनानुस्मरणानुभावः ॥ ४४४ ॥
Śri Prahlada's faith in regard to his own experience is expressed in the following words:
It is not by my own power that the tusks of these elephants, which were as hard as the tip of a thunderbolt, got smashed. It is only the effect of continuous remembrance of Bhagavan Janardana, which destroys all great calamities. (VP 1.17.44)3
This type of experience, which is actually a concomitant effect of bhakti, becomes manifest only if pure devotees of Bhagavän desire it so as to demonstrate the glory of Bhagavan, but they never desire it for their own protection or to show their own greatness. This is illustrated in Prahlada's statement, as quoted above.
श्रीपरीक्षित्प्रभृतिभिस्तु तदपि नेष्टं यथा “द्विजोपसृष्टः कुहकस्तक्षको वा दशत्वलं गायत विष्णुगाथाः " ( भा० १।१९।१५) इति ।
Devotees like Śri Parikṣit, however, do not desire even that. This is indicated in these words of Parikṣit Mahārāja:
2
O brāhmaṇas, may you as well as Goddess Ganga know me as a surrendered soul, whose mind is fixed on Bhagavan. Let
the treachery conjured by the brāhmaṇa consume me, or let
apannaḥ samsṛtim ghoram yan-nāma vivašo grnan
tataḥ sadyo vimucyeta yad bibheti svayam bhayam
› dantā gajānām kulisagra-nisthurāḥ sirna yad ete na balam mamaitat
maha-vipat-papa-vināśano'yam janardanānusmaraṇānubhavaḥ
920
155 Faithlessness Is Symptomatic of Aparadha
the snake Takşaka bite me; just go on singing the glories of Bhagavan Viṣṇu. (SB 1.19.15)"
स्पष्टम् ॥ राजा ॥
The meaning of this statement is clear.
Commentary
ŚRI JIVA HERE pinpoints the reason why some people cannot have faith in bhakti even after hearing its glories. This is due to some past offense. If the offense is severe in nature, it would prevent a person from having faith in bhakti even after personally witnessing its power.
Śrī Jīva gives the example of Duryodhana. When Kṛṣṇa went as a peace messenger to Hastinapura, He advised Dhṛtarastra, Duryo- dhana's father, to return the Pandavas' kingdom to them. But Dhr- tarastra did not pay heed to Kṛṣṇa's counsel, offering the excuse that he was helpless because of Duryodhana's obstinacy. Kṛṣṇa then advised him to grant just five villages for the Pāṇḍavas. But Duryodhana would not agree even to this concession. As a last resort, Kṛṣṇa met Dhṛtarastra privately and urged him to capture Duryodhana and put him in prison, arguing that this alone would save the Kaurava dynasty from destruction. He asserted that both sides would be killed in the war and that this destruction would ensue only on account of Duryodhana's adamancy.
When Duryodhana came to know about Krsna's recommenda- tion to his father, he was furious. He consulted with Karna and his brother Duhsasana and decided to capture Kṛṣṇa and imprison Him, although it was a violation of dharma to apprehend a messen- ger. Moreover, Kṛṣṇa was their honored guest. They decided that
✦ tam mopayātam pratiyantu viprā gangă ca devi dhṛta-cittam ise
dvijopasṛṣṭaḥ kuhakas takṣako vā daŝatv alam gayata vişnu-gathah
9211 Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
on the next day, when Kṛṣṇa would enter the assembly hall, they would catch Him and bind Him with ropes.
As planned, the next day when Krsna entered the hall, the three men surrounded Him with ropes in their hands. When Kṛṣṇa saw this, He first smiled and then started laughing. While laughing out loud, He manifested His universal form, wherein the whole uni- verse was seen as contained in His body. When this occurred, Dur- yodhana and his accomplices collapsed on the ground. Kṛṣṇa left the entire assembly agape. Nevertheless, even after seeing the uni- versal form, Duryodhana could not believe in Krsna's Godhood. He claimed that Krsna was accomplished in magic, and this was just a trick that He conjured. This justification was the effect of his offen- sive mentality. Arjuna also later saw the universal form, but he was able to recognize the true nature of Krsna's essential being and praised Him reverently as Parameśvara.
In the case of Prahlada, it was seen that bhakti's intrinsic power is identical to that of Bhagavan Himself. As a consequence of Prahlada's absolute faith in bhakti, he could not be harmed even by the most powerful asura the world has ever known, and even by being subjected to the severest of atrocities. Yet although bhakti truly has such power, devotees have no desire for bhakti to manifest its miraculous capacities just to protect them. They are completely devoid of desire for anything except loving service to Bhagavan. King Parikṣit exhibited this attitude in the face of his imminent death, "Let the snake Taksaka come and bite me. I am not wor- ried." He only wanted to hear about Bhagavan. He did not pray to Bhagavan to protect him from the snake.
Earlier it was demonstrated that bhakti protects the devotee from all fears and has the power to dispel all obstacles. If Parīkṣit had wanted, he could have prayed for such protection. But this type of desire has no standing in pure bhakti. A devotee does not desire even the ecstasy that is intrinsic to bhakti, if the experience of it somehow becomes an obstacle to his service.
Someone might ask, "Are not miracles an inducement to faith, and do devotees not wish to see others develop faith? Indeed, is not the recounting of stories, such as Arjuna's viśva-rupa-darśana in
922
155 Faithlessness Is Symptomatic of Aparādha
the Gita, meant to engender faith?" Moreover, it could be objected, "Since you cannot demonstrate the miraculous effects spoken of in scripture, you merely claim that you do not wish to do so."
The answer to these challenges is as explained above. Although devotees do wish that others may develop faith in bhakti, they do not want to utilize the power of bhakti toward that end. They prefer to try to convince people of the greatness of bhakti on the basis of the philosophical truths disclosed in scripture. Otherwise, people who are convinced only by the display of miracles would have faith in miracles alone and not in the ultimate goal of bhakti. Worldly people are interested in enjoying material pleasures. It is practi- cally evidenced that some charismatic spiritual leaders attract fol- lowers by exhibiting miraculous powers. Such followers remain ensnared by the allurement of miracles.
These displays, however, have no relevance in bhakti. The abil- ity to perform miracles is not a sign of a great devotee. Those who require the confirmation of miracles merely betray the weakness of their faith. Thus, it is to be understood that the various attitudes of nonbelief are symptomatic of a person's unreadiness for bhakti or of their being obstructed by a past offense.
923
