+++
title = "157"
+++
Absorption in Objects Unrelated to Bhakti
१५७ । अथ भगवन्निष्ठाच्यावकवस्त्वन्तराभिनिवेशो यथा “ एवमघटमानमनोरथाकुलह- दयो मृगदारकाभासेन स्वारब्धकर्मणा योगारम्भणतो विभ्रंशितः स योगतापसो भगवदा- राधनलक्षणाच् च” (भा० ५/८/२६) इति ।
WE WILL NOW discuss the third effect of aparādha — namely, absorption in objects unrelated to devotion that erode one's fix- ity in Bhagavan (bhagavan-niṣṭhā-cyavaka-vastv-antarābhinive- śaḥ). This is demonstrated in this statement of Śrī Śuka:
His heart being thus agitated with impossible fantasies [about the deer], this ascetic yogi [Bharata] fell down from his practice of yoga and also from the worship of Bhagavan because of his prārabdha-karma, which appeared to him in the form of a fawn. (SB 5.8.26)1
स श्रीभरतः । अत्रैवं चिन्त्यम् - भगवद्भक्त्यन्तरायकं सामान्यम् प्रारब्धकर्म न भवितु- मर्हति दुर्बलत्वात् । ततः प्राचीनापराधात्मकमेव तल्लभ्यत इन्द्रद्युम्नादीनामिवेति ॥ श्रीशुकः ॥
In this verse, the demonstrative adjective saḥ, "this" [ascetic yogi], refers to King Bharata. A point to consider here is that ordinarily prārabdha-karma cannot be an obstacle to bhagavad- bhakti, because it is weaker. Thus, the prārabdha-karma spoken
evam aghaṭamana-manorathakula-hṛdayo mrga-darakābhāsena svārabdha-karmana yogarambhanato vibhramsitaḥ sa yoga-tapaso bhagavad-aradhana-lakṣaṇāc ca...
926
157 Absorption in Objects Unrelated to Bhakti
of here should be understood to be the outcome of some past offense, as was the case with King Indradyumna and others.
Commentary
IN THIS ANUCCHEDA, Śrī Jiva illustrates by way of an example how an offense can lead to absorption in objects other than Bha- gavan, causing one to give up the practice of bhakti. Bharata, the eldest son of Bhagavan Rṣabhadeva, was a great king and devo- tee. He renounced his kingdom as a young man and retired to the Himalayas to engage in bhakti. While living on the bank of the Gandaki River, he was fully absorbed in his worship of Śālagrāma and meditation on Bhagavan.
One day, when he went to bathe in the river, he saw a preg- nant doe that was drinking water. At that very moment, a lion approached, roaring loudly. The doe became frightened, and to save herself, she jumped over to the other side of the river, which was quite narrow at that point. In the process, she had a miscar- riage, and her baby fell into the river. When the frustrated lion left, the king saved the baby deer and brought it to his asrama. He took care of it, and as it grew up, the king became greatly attached to it. Although the king had previously renounced his family members, all of whom were very dear to him, he now became totally absorbed in thoughts of the deer. As a result of this, he gradually neglected his worship and meditation. After all, the mind is singular in its ori- entation, and it cannot be attached to the world and to Bhagavan at the same time.
Although the text says that this occurred because of the matured effects of past karma (svarabdha-karmaṇā), Śrī Jīva com- ments that karma, being weaker by nature, has no power to obstruct bhakti. What happened to Bharata was the outcome of some past offense. The offense impeded his bhakti, and the king became fully absorbed in the deer.
Another example of such an offense is found in the history of King Indradyumna. King Indradyumna offended the sage Agastya,
927
I Bhakti Is the Complete Abhidheya
and as a result he was born as an elephant. Becoming identi- fied with the elephant body, he forgot about bhakti and became absorbed in material pleasures. The implied message is that if a devotee is losing interest in bhakti and becoming attracted to mate- rial objects, relations, power, or position, then it is to be known for sure that this is an outcome of some past or present offense, or both.
Here, the following doubt may be raised. What was Bharata's fault in caring for the deer? Was it not proper for him to show com- passion to a drowning baby deer? The answer is that the act of sav- ing and taking care of the baby deer was not wrong. His mistake was to become so totally absorbed in this project that he neglected his worship of and meditation on Bhagavan. He thought of himself as the savior and unique protector of the deer, forgetting that the ultimate savior is Bhagavan and that he was merely an instrument. Thus, the defect was to consider himself merciful independent of Bhagavan.
928
