+++
title = "160"
+++
An Offenseless Person Can Chant
the Name at Death
१६० । व्यतिरेकेणाह (भा० ६ |२| ३३) -
|
AJAMILA Confirms the same conclusion by negative concomitance:
अन्यथा म्रियमाणस्य नाशुचेर्वृषलीपतेः । वैकुण्ठनामग्रहणं जिह्वा वक्तुमिहार्हति ॥ ४५० ॥
If it were not so, then it would not have been possible for my tongue to utter the holy name of Bhagavan Visņu in that helpless state while dying, for I am a most impure man and the husband of a prostitute. (SB 6.2.33)1
स्पष्टम् ॥ श्रीमानजामिलः ॥
The meaning of this statement is clear.
Commentary
THIS verse follows immediately after the one quoted in the previ- ous anuccheda. In this regard, Śrīdhara Svāmi comments that the word anyatha, "if it were not so," means, "how could this be, if I had not performed some pious deeds in my past life?" (pūrva-puṇyaṁ
1
anyatha mriyamanasya naśucer vrsali-pateh vaikuntha-nama-grahanam jihva vaktum ihärhati
942
160 An Offenseless Person Can Chant the Name at Death
vinā katham bhūtam). Here Ajamila infers that it would not have been possible for him to utter "Nārāyaṇa" at the time of death if he had not been free from offenses.
From the word mangalena in the previous verse, "by some greatly auspicious or pious deed," it should be understood that Ajamila must have been blessed with the association of some devo- tees in the past as a consequence of which he named his son Nārā- yana. This is the opinion of Śrī Viśvanatha Cakravarti. In the present context, it also implies that he was free of offenses. Śrī Jiva Gosvāmī comments in Krama-sandarbha that Ajamila must have executed bhakti in his past life, but his bhakti was covered due to some offense. After undergoing a sinful life as the husband of a prostitute, the result of his prior offense came to an end.
943
